SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
CONTEXT: Ambedkar responds to Mahatma Gandhi’s critique of his original speech “Annihilation of Caste” published in Harijan and letters.
I appreciate greatly the honour done me by the Mahatma in taking notice
in his Harijan of the speech on Caste which I had prepared for the Jat Pat
Todak Mandal. From a perusal of his review of my speech it is clear that
the Mahatma completely dissents from the views I have expressed on the
subject of Caste. I am not in the habit of entering into controversy with
my opponents unless there are special reasons which compel me to act
otherwise. Had my opponent been some mean and obscure person I would
not have pursued him. But my opponent being the Mahatma himself I feel
I must attempt to meet the case to the contrary which he has sought to
put forth. While I appreciate the honour he has done me, I must confess to
a sense of surprize on finding that of all the persons the Mahatma should
accuse me of a desire to seek publicity as he seems to do when he suggests
that in publishing the undelivered speech my object was to see that I was
not “forgotten”. Whatever the Mahatma may choose to say my object in
publishing the speech was to provoke the Hindus to think and take stock
of their position. I have never hankered for publicity and if I may say so, I
have more of it than I wish or need. But supposing it was out of the motive
of gaining publicity that I printed the speech who could cast a stone at me ?
Surely not those, who like the Mahatma live in glass houses.
Motive apart, what has the Mahatma to say on the question raised by
me in the speech ? First of all any one who reads my speech will realize
that the Mahatma has entirely missed the issues raised by me and that the
issues be has raised are not the issues that arise out of what he is pleased
to call my indictment of the Hindus. The principal points which I have tried
to make out in my speech may be catalogued as follows : (1) That caste has
ruined the Hindus ; (2) That the reorganization of the Hindu society on the
basis of Chaturvarnya is impossible because the Varnavyavastha is like a
leaky pot or like a man running at the nose. It is incapable of sustaining
itself by its own virtue and has an inherent tendency to degenerate into a
caste system unless there is a legal sanction behind it which can be enforced
against every one transgressing his Varna ; (3) That the reorganization of the
Hindu Society on the basis of Chaturvarnya is harmful because the effect of
the Varnavyavastha is to degrade the masses by denying them opportunity to
acquire knowledge and to emasculate them by denying them the right to be
armed ; (4) That the Hindu society must be reorganized on a religious basis
which would recognise the principles of Liberty, Equality and Fraternity;
(5) That in order to achieve this object the sense of religious sanctity behind Caste and Varna must be destroyed ; (6) That the sanctity of Caste and
Varna can be destroyed only by discarding the divine authority of the
Shastras. It will be noticed that the questions raised by the Mahatma
are absolutely beside the point and show that the main argument of the
speech was lost upon him.
Let me examine the substance of the points made by the Mahatma. The
first point made by the Mahatma is that the texts cited by me are not
authentic. I confess I am no authority on this matter. But I should like to
state that the texts cited by me are all taken from the writings of the late
Mr. Tilak who was a recognised authority on the Sanskrit language and
on the Hindu Shastras. His second point is that these Shastras should be
interpreted not by the learned but the saints and that, as the saints have
understood them, the Shastras do not support Caste and Untouchability. As
regards the first point what I like to ask the Mahatma is what does it avail
to any one if the texts are interpolations and if they have been differently
interpreted by the saints ? The masses do not make any distinction between
texts which are genuine and texts which are interpolations. The masses do
not know what the texts are. They are too illiterate to know the contents
of the Shastras. They have believed what they have been told and what
they have been told is that the Shastras do enjoin as a religious duty the
observance of Caste and Untouchability.
With regard to the saints, one must admit that howsoever different
and elevating their teachings may have been as compared to those of
the merely learned they have been lamentably ineffective. They have
been ineffective for two reasons. Firstly, none of the saints ever attacked
the Caste System. On the contrary, they were staunch believers in the
System of Castes. Most of them lived and died as members of the castes
which they respectively belonged. So passionately attached was Jnyandeo
to his status as a Brahmin that when the Brahmins of Paithan would
not admit him to their fold he moved heaven and earth to get his status
as a Brahmin recognized by the Brahmin fraternity. And even the saint
Eknath who now figures in the film “Dharmatma” as a hero for having
shown courage to touch the untouchables and dine with them, did so not
because he was opposed to Caste and Untouchability but because he felt
that the pollution caused thereby could be washed away by a bath in the
sacred waters of the river Ganges. The saints have never according to
my study carried on a campaign against Caste and Untouchability. They
were not concerned with the struggle between men. They were concerned
with the relation between man and God. They did not preach that all men
were equal. They preached that all men were equal in the eyes of God—a very different and a very innocuous proposition which nobody can find
difficult to preach or dangerous to believe in. The second reason why the
teachings of the saints proved ineffective was because the masses have been
taught that a saint might break Caste but the common man must not. A
saint therefore never became an example to follow. He always remained a
pious man to be honoured. That the masses have remained staunch believers
in Caste and Untouchability shows that the pious lives and noble sermons
of the saints have had no effect on their life and conduct as against the
teachings of the Shastras. Thus it can be a matter of no consolation that
there were saints or that there is a Mahatma who understands the Shastras
differently from the learned few or ignorant many. That the masses hold
different view of the Shastras is fact which should and must be reckoned
with. How is that to be dealt with except by denouncing the authority of
the Shastras, which continue to govern their conduct, is a question which
the Mahatma has not considered. But whatever the plan the Mahatma puts
forth as an effective means to free the masses from the teachings of the
Shastras, he must accept that the pious life led by one good Samaritan may
be very elevating to himself but in India, with the attitude the common man
has to saints and to Mahatmas—to honour but not to follow—one cannot
make much out of it.
The third point made by the Mahatma is that a religion professed by
Chaitanya, Jnyandeo, Tukaram, Tiruvalluvar, Ramkrishna Paramahansa
etc. cannot be devoid of merit as is made out by me and that a religion
has to be judged not by its worst specimens but by the best it might have
produced. I agree with every word of this statement. But I do not quite
understand what the Mahatma wishes to prove thereby. That religion should
be judged not by its worst specimens but by its best is true enough but does
it dispose of the matter ? I say it does not. The question still remains—why
the worst number so many and the best so few ? To my mind there are
two conceivable answers to this question : (1) That the worst by reason of
some original perversity of theirs are morally uneducable and are therefore
incapable of making the remotest approach to the religious ideal. Or (2) That
the religious ideal is a wholly wrong ideal which has given a wrong moral
twist to the lives of the many and that the best have become best in spite
of the wrong ideal—in fact by giving to the wrong twist a turn in the right
direction. Of these two explanations I am not prepared to accept the first
and I am sure that even the Mahatma will not insist upon the contrary. To
my mind the second is the only logical and reasonable explanation unless
the Mahatma has a third alternative to explain why the worst are so many
and the best so few. If the second is the only explanation then obviously
the argument of the Mahatma that a religion should be judged by its best
followers carries us nowhere except to pity the lot of the many who have
gone wrong because they have been made to worship wrong ideals.
