data25.txt   SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches
BOOK TITLE: What Congress and Gandhi Have Done to the Untouchables
AUTHOR: Dr. B. R. Ambedkar
TYPE: Political Critique / Historical Analysis

Here was an opportunity for Mr. Gandhi to advance his anti-Untouchability
campaign. He could have proposed that if a Hindu wished to enroll himself
as a member of the Congress, he should prove that he did not observe
Untouchability. The employment of an Untouchable in his household
could have been adduced as proof, and no other evidence should have
been allowed.
Such a proposal would not have been impracticable, for almost every
Hindu—certainly those who called themselves high-caste Hindus—kept
more than one servant in his household. If Mr. Gandhi could make the
Hindu accept spinning and boycott as a franchise for membership of the
Congress, he could also have made acceptable the employment of an
Untouchable in a Hindu household as a franchise for membership.
But Mr. Gandhi did not do it.
From 1924 till 1930 there is a complete blank. Mr. Gandhi does not appear
to have taken any active steps for the removal of Untouchability, nor did
he get himself interested in any activity beneficial to the Untouchables
during this period.
While Mr. Gandhi was inactive, the Untouchables had started a movement
called the Satyagraha movement. The object of the movement was to
establish their right to take water from public wells and to enter public
temples.
The Satyagraha at the Chawdar Tank, situated in Mahad in the Kolaba
District of the Bombay Presidency, was organised to establish the right of
the Untouchables to take water from public watering places.
The Satyagraha at the Kala-Ram Temple, situated in Nasik in the Nasik
District of the Bombay Presidency, was organised to establish the right of
the Untouchables to enter Hindu temples.
There were many minor Satyagrahas, but these two were the principal
ones. The din and noise caused by them were heard all over India.
Thousands of men and women from the Untouchable community took
part.
Both men and women were insulted and beaten by caste Hindus.
Many were injured, and some were imprisoned by the Government on the
ground of causing breach of the peace.
This Satyagraha movement continued for six full years and was brought
to a close in 1935 at a Conference held in Yeola in the Nasik District. As a
result of the adamantine refusal of the Hindus to grant equal social rights,
the Untouchables resolved to leave the Hindu fold.
This movement was independent of the Congress. It was organised by
the Untouchables, led by the Untouchables, and financed by the
Untouchables.
Yet the Untouchables were not without hope of receiving moral support
from Mr. Gandhi. The weapon of Satyagraha was forged by him and used
by the Congress against the British Government to win Swaraj.
Naturally, the Untouchables expected Mr. Gandhi’s full support in their
Satyagraha against caste Hindus. But Mr. Gandhi did not support it.
Not only did he withhold support, he condemned it in strong terms.
Mr. Gandhi claims exclusive credit for two weapons—Satyagraha and
fasting. He used Satyagraha many times against the British Government
but never against Hindus to open wells and temples to the Untouchables.
Mr. Gandhi undertook twenty-one fasts. Some were for Hindu-Muslim
unity, many for the moral lapses of inmates of his Ashram, and one even
for a scavenger’s employment in a jail.
There was not a single fast undertaken for the removal of Untouchability.
In 1930 came the Round Table Conference, and Mr. Gandhi joined it in
1931. The framing of a constitution for self-governing India was discussed.
It was agreed that government must be by the people.
Given India’s deep social cleavages, communal representation was
considered necessary. The problem of the Untouchables assumed great
importance.
The Untouchables demanded political safeguards and communal
representation, refusing to be left to the mercy of caste Hindus. Their
demand was accepted as just and logical.
The chasm between Hindus and Untouchables, they argued, was far
greater than that between Hindus and Muslims. The former was both
religious and social, creating a master-slave relationship.
Here was an opportunity for Mr. Gandhi to support them. Instead, he
opposed them, made a pact with Muslims to isolate the Untouchables,
and later went on a fast unto death to compel the British Government to
withdraw their decision.
When compelled to accept the Poona Pact, Mr. Gandhi took revenge by
allowing the Congress to use foul electioneering tactics to nullify the
political rights of the Untouchables.
