SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TITLE: Castes in India: Their Mechanism, Genesis and Development
TYPE: Academic Paper
YEAR: 1916
CONTEXT: Anthropological analysis of caste system

Mr. Nesfield in his way dwells on the absence of messing with those outside
the Caste as one of its characteristics. In spite of the newness of the point
we must say that Mr. Nesfield has mistaken the effect for the cause. Caste,
being a self-enclosed unit naturally limits social intercourse, including
messing etc. to members within it. Consequently this absence of messing
with outsiders is not due to positive prohibition, but is a natural result of
Caste, i.e. exclusiveness. No doubt this absence of messing originally due to
exclusiveness, acquired the prohibitory character of a religious injunction,
but it may be regarded as a later growth. Sir H. Risley, makes no new point
deserving of special attention.
We now pass on to the definition of Dr. Ketkar who has done much
for the elucidation of the subject. Not only is he a native, but he has also
brought a critical acumen and an open mind to bear on his study of Caste.
His definition merits consideration, for he has defined Caste in its relation
to a system of Castes, and has concentrated his attention only on those
characteristics which are absolutely necessary for the existence of a Caste
within a system, rightly excluding all others as being secondary or derivative
in character. With respect to his definition it must, however, be said that
in it there is a slight confusion of thought, lucid and clear as otherwise it
is. He speaks of Prohibition of Intermarriage and Membership by Autogeny
as the two characteristics of Caste. I submit that these are but two aspects
of one and the same thing, and not two different things as Dr. Ketkar
supposes them to be. If you prohibit intermarriage the result is that you
limit membership to those born within the group. Thus the two are the
obverse and the reverse sides of the same medal.
This critical evaluation of the various characteristics of Caste leave no doubt
that prohibition, or rather the absence of intermarriage—endogamy, to be
concise—is the only one that can be called the essence of Caste when rightly
understood. But some may deny this on abstract anthropological grounds, for
there exist endogamous groups without giving rise to the problem of Caste. In
a general way this may be true, as endogamous societies, culturally different,
making their abode in localities more or less removed, and having little to
do with each other are a physical reality. The Negroes and the Whites and
the various tribal groups that go by name of American Indians in the United
States may be cited as more or less appropriate illustrations in support of
this view. But we must not confuse matters, for in India the situation is
different. As pointed out before, the peoples of India form a homogeneous
whole. The various races of India occupying definite territories have more or
less fused into one another and do possess cultural unity, which is the only
criterion of a homogeneous population. Given this homogeneity as a basis,
Caste becomes a problem altogether new in character and wholly absent in
the situation constituted by the mere propinquity of endogamous social or tribal groups. Caste in India means an artificial chopping off of the population
into fixed and definite units, each one prevented from fusing into another
through the custom of endogamy. Thus the conclusion is inevitable that
Endogamy is the only characteristic that is peculiar to caste, and if we
succeed in showing how endogamy is maintained, we shall practically have
proved the genesis and also the mechanism of Caste.
It may not be quite easy for you to anticipate why I regard endogamy as
a key to the mystery of the Caste system. Not to strain your imagination
too much, I will proceed to give you my reasons for it.
It may not also be out of place to emphasize at this moment that no
civilized society of today presents more survivals of primitive times than does
the Indian society. Its religion is essentially primitive and its tribal code, in
spite of the advance of time and civilization, operates in all its pristine vigour
even today. One of these primitive survivals, to which I wish particularly to
draw your attention is the Custom of Exogamy. The prevalence of exogamy
in the primitive worlds is a fact too wellknown to need any explanation.
With the growth of history, however, exogamy has lost its efficacy, and
excepting the nearest blood-kins, there is usually no social bar restricting
the field of marriage. But regarding the peoples of India the law of exogamy
is a positive injunction even today. Indian society still savours of the clan
system, even though there are no clans ; and this can be easily seen from
the law of matrimony which centres round the principle of exogamy, for it is
not that Sapindas (blood-kins) cannot marry, but a marriage even between
Sagotras (of the same class) is regarded as a sacrilege.
Nothing is therefore more important for you to remember than the fact
that endogamy is foreign to the people of India. The various Gotras of
India are and have been exogamous : so are the other groups with totemic
organization. It is no exaggeration to say that with the people of India
exogamy is a creed and none dare infringe it, so much so that, in spite of
the endogamy of the Castes within them, exogamy is strictly observed and
that there are more rigorous penalties for violating exogamy than there are
for violating endogamy. You will, therefore, readily see that with exogamy
as the rule there could be no Caste, for exogamy means fusion. But we have
castes ; consequently in the final analysis creation of Castes, so far as India
is concerned, means the superposition of endogamy on exogamy. However,
in an originally exogamous population an easy working out of endogamy
(which is equivalent to the creation of Caste) is a grave problem, and it is
in the consideration of the means utilized for the preservation of endogamy
against exogamy that we may hope to find the solution of our problem.
Thus the superposition of endogamy on exogamy means the creation of caste.
But this is not an easy affair. Let us take an imaginary group that desires
to make itself into a Caste and analyse what means it will have to adopt to make itself endogamous. If a group desires to make itself endogamous a
formal injunction against intermarriage with outside groups will be of no
avail, especially if prior to the introduction of endogamy, exogamy had been
the rule in all matrimonial relations. Again, there is a tendency in all groups
lying in close contact with one another to assimilate and amalgamate, and
thus consolidate into a homogeneous society. If this tendency is to be strongly
counteracted in the interest of Caste formation, it is absolutely necessary
to circumscribe a circle outside which people should not contract marriages.
Nevertheless, this encircling to prevent marriages from without creates
problems from within which are not very easy of solution. Roughly speaking,
in a normal group the two sexes are more or less evenly distributed, and
generally speaking there is an equality between those of the same age.
The equality is, however, never quite realized in actual societies. At the
same time to the group that is desirous of making itself into a caste the
maintenance of equality between the sexes becomes the ultimate goal, for
without it. endogamy can no longer subsist. In other words, if endogamy
is to be preserved conjugal rights from within have to be provided for,
otherwise members of the group will be driven out of the circle to take care
of themselves in any way they can. But in order that the conjugal rights be
provided for from within, it is absolutely necessary to maintain a numerical
equality between the marriageable units of the two sexes within the group
desirous of making itself into a Caste. It is only through the maintenance
of such an equality that the necessary endogamy of the group can be kept
intact, and a very large disparity is sure to break it.
The problem of Caste, then, ultimately resolves itself into one of repairing
the disparity between the marriageable units of the two sexes within it. Left
to nature, the much needed parity between the units can be realized only
when a couple dies simultaneously. But this is a rare contingency. The
husband may die before the wife and create a surplus woman, who must be
disposed of, else through intermarriage she will violate the endogamy of the
group. In like manner the husband may survive his wife and be surplus man,
whom the group, while it may sympathise with him for the sad bereavement,
has to dispose of, else he will marry outside the Caste and will break the
endogamy. Thus both the surplus man and the surplus woman constitute a
menace to the Caste if not taken care of, for not finding suitable partners
inside their prescribed circle (and left to themselves they cannot find any,
for if the matter be not regulated there can only be just enough pairs to
go round) very likely they will transgress the boundary, marry outside and
import offspring that is foreign to the Caste.