SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TITLE: Castes in India: Their Mechanism, Genesis and Development
TYPE: Academic Paper
YEAR: 1916
CONTEXT: Anthropological analysis of caste system

This high-flown and ingenious sophistry indicates why these institutions
were honoured, but does not tell us why they were practised. My own
interpretation is that they were honoured because they were practised.
Any one slightly acquainted with rise of individualism in the 18th century
will appreciate my remark. At all times, it is the movement that is most
important; and the philosophies grow around it long afterwards to justify it
and give it a moral support. In like manner I urge that the very fact that
these customs were so highly eulogized proves that they needed eulogy for
their prevalence. Regarding the question as to why they arose, I submit
that they were needed to create the structure of caste and the philosophies
in honour of them were intended to popularize them, or to gild the pill,
as we might say, for they must have been so abominable and shocking to
the moral sense of the unsophisticated that they needed a great deal of
sweetening. These customs are essentially of the nature of means, though they
are represented as ideals. But this should not blind us from understanding
the results that flow from them. One might safely say that idealization of
means is necessary and in this particular case was perhaps motivated to
endow them with greater efficacy. Calling a means an end does no harm,
except that it disguises its real character ; but it does not deprive it of its
real nature, that of a means. You may pass a law that all cats are dogs,
just as you can call a means an end. But you can no more change the
nature of means thereby than you can turn cats into dogs; consequently I
am justified in holding that, whether regarded as ends or as means, Sati,
enforced widowhood and girl marriage are customs that were primarily
intended to solve the problem of the surplus man and surplus woman in a
caste and to maintain its endogamy. Strict endogamy could not be preserved
without these customs, while caste without endogamy is a fake.
Having explained the mechanism of the creation and preservation of
Caste in India, the further question as to its genesis naturally arises. The
question or origin is always an annoying question and in the study of Caste
it is sadly neglected ; some have connived at it, while others have dodged it.
Some are puzzled as to whether there could be such a thing as the origin
of caste and suggest that “if we cannot control our fondness for the word
‘origin’, we should better use the plural form, viz. ‘origins of caste’ ”. As for
myself I do not feel puzzled by the Origin of Caste in India for, as I have
established before, endogamy is the only characteristic of Caste and when
I say Origin of Caste I mean The Origin of the Mechanism for Endogamy. The atomistic conception of individuals in a Society so greatly popularised—
I was about to say vulgarized—in political orations is the greatest humbug.
To say that individuals make up society is trivial; society is always composed
of classes. It may be an exaggeration to assert the theory of class-conflict,
but the existence of definite classes in a society is a fact. Their basis may
differ. They may be economic or intellectual or social, but an individual in
a society is always a member of a class. This is a universal fact and early
Hindu society could not have been an exception to this rule, and, as a matter
of fact, we know it was not. If we bear this generalization in mind, our study
of the genesis of caste would be very much facilitated, for we have only to
determine what was the class that first made itself into a caste, for class
and caste, so to say, are next door neighbours, and it is only a span that
separates the two. A Caste is an Enclosed Class.
The study of the origin of caste must furnish us with an answer to the
question—what is the class that raised this “enclosure” around itself ? The
question may seem too inquisitorial, but it is pertinent, and an answer to
this will serve us to elucidate the mystery of the growth and development
of castes all over India. Unfortunately a direct answer to this question is
not within my power. I can answer it only indirectly. I said just above that
the customs in question were current in the Hindu society. To be true to
facts it is necessary to qualify the statement, as it connotes universality of
their prevalence. These customs in all their strictness are obtainable only in
one caste, namely the Brahmins, who occupy the highest place in the social
hierarchy of the Hindu society ; and as their prevalence in non-Brahmin castes
is derivative of their observance is neither strict nor complete. This important
fact can serve as a basis of an important observation. If the prevalence of
these customs in the non-Brahmin Castes is derivative, as can be shown
very easily, then it needs no argument to prove what class is the father of
the institution of caste. Why the Brahmin class should have enclosed itself
into a caste is a different question, which may be left as an employment
for another occasion. But the strict observance of these customs and the
social superiority arrogated by the priestly class in all ancient civilizations
are sufficient to prove that they were the originators of this “unnatural
institution” founded and maintained through these unnatural means.
I now come to the third part of my paper regarding the question of the
growth and spread of the caste system all over India. The question I have
to answer is : How did the institution of caste spread among the rest of the
non-Brahmin population of the country ? The question of the spread of the
castes all over India has suffered a worse fate than the question of genesis.
And the main cause, as it seems to me, is that the two questions of spread
and of origin are not separated. This is because of the common belief among
scholars that the caste system has either been imposed upon the docile population of India by a law-giver as a divine dispensation, or that it has
grown according to some law of social growth peculiar to the Indian people.
I first propose to handle the law-giver of India. Every country has its
law-giver, who arises as an incarnation (avatar) in times of emergency to set
right a sinning humanity and give it the laws of justice and morality. Manu,
the law-giver of India, if he did exist, was certainly an audacious person. If
the story that he gave the law of caste be credited, then Manu must have
been a dare-devil fellow and the humanity that accepted his dispensation
must be a humanity quite different from the one we are acquainted with. It
is unimaginable that the law of caste was given. It is hardly an exaggeration
to say that Manu could not have outlived his law, for what is that class that
can submit to be degraded to the status of brutes by the pen of a man, and
suffer him to raise another class to the pinnacle ? Unless he was a tyrant
who held all the population in subjection it cannot be imagined that he
could have been allowed to dispense his patronage in this grossly unjust
manner, as may be easily seen by a mere glance at his “Institutes”. I may
seem hard on Manu. but I am sure my force is not strong enough to kill
his ghost. He lives, like a disembodied spirit and is appealed to, and I am
afraid will yet live long. One thing I want to impress upon you is that Manu
did not give the law of Caste and that he could not do so. Caste existed
long before Manu. He was an upholder of it and therefore philosophised
about it, but certainly he did not and could not ordain the present order of
Hindu Society. His work ended with the codification of existing caste rules
and the preaching of Caste Dharma. The spread and growth of the Caste
system is too gigantic a task to be achieved by the power or cunning of an
individual or of a class. Similar in argument is the theory that the Brahmins
created the Caste. After what I have said regarding Manu, I need hardly
say anything more, except to point out that it is incorrect in thought and
malicious in intent. The Brahmins may have been guilty of many things,
and I dare say they were, but the imposing of the caste system on the nonBrahmin population was beyond their mettle. They may have helped the
process by their glib philosophy, but they certainly could not have pushed
their scheme beyond their own confines. To fashion society after one’s own
pattern ! How glorious ! How hard ! One can take pleasure and eulogize
its furtherance, but cannot further it very far. The vehemence of my attack
may seem to be unnecessary ; but I can assure you that it is not uncalled
for. There is a strong belief in the mind of orthodox Hindus that the Hindu
Society was somehow moulded into the framework of the Caste System and
that it is an organization consciously created by the Shastras. Not only does
this belief exist, but it is being justified on the ground that it cannot but
be good, because it is ordained by the Shastras and the Shastras cannot
be wrong. I have urged so much on the adverse side of this attitude, not
because the religious sanctity is grounded on scientific basis, nor to help
those reformers who are preaching against it. Preaching did not make the caste system neither will it unmake it. My aim is to show the falsity of
the attitude that has exalted religious sanction to the position of a scientific
explanation. Thus the great man theory does not help us very far in solving the spread
of castes in India. Western scholars, probably not much given to heroworship, have attempted other explanations. The nuclei, round which have
“formed” the various castes in India, are, according to them : (1) occupation;
(2) survivals of tribal organizations etc. ; (3) the rise of new belief; (4) crossbreeding and (5) migration.