SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 3
TITLE: Buddha or Karl Marx
TYPE: Philosophical Treatise / Comparative Ideological Analysis


We must now turn to the evaluation of means. We must ask whose
means are superior and lasting in the long run. There are, however,
some misunderstandings on both sides. It is necessary to clear them up.
Take violence. As to violence there are many people who seem to
shiver at the very thought of it. But this is only a sentiment. Violence
cannot be altogether dispensed with. Even in non-communist countries
a murderer is hanged. Does not hanging amount to violence? NonCommunist countries go to war with non-Communist countries. Millions
of people are killed. Is this no violence ? If a murderer can be killed,
because he has killed a citizen, if a soldier can be killed in war because
he belongs to a hostile nation why cannot a property owner be killed
if his ownership leads to misery for the rest of humanity ? There is no
reason to make an exception in favour of the property owner, why one
should regard private property as sacrosanct.
The Buddha was against violence. But he was also in favour of justice
and where justice required he permitted the use of force. This is well
illustrated in his dialogue with Sinha Senapati the Commander-in-Chief
of Vaishali. Sinha having come to know that the Buddha I preached
Ahimsa went to him and asked:
“The Bhagvan preaches Ahimsa. Does the Bhagvan preach an offender
to be given freedom from punishment ? Does the Bhagvan preach that
we should not go to war to save our wives, our children and our wealth ?
Should we suffer at the hands of criminals in the name of Ahimsa.?” 
“Does the Tathagata prohibit all war even when it is in the interest
of Truth and Justice?”
Buddha replied, You have wrongly understood what I have been
preaching. An offender must be punished and an innocent man must
be freed. It is not a fault of the Magistrate if he punishes an offender.
The cause of punishment is the fault of the offender. The Magistrate
who inflicts the punishment is only carrying out the law. He does not
become stained with Ahimsa. A man who fights for justice and safety
cannot be accused of Ahimsa. If all the means of maintaining peace
have failed then the responsibility for Himsa falls on him who starts
war. One must never surrender to evil powers. War there may be. But
it must not be for selfish ends….”
There are of course other grounds against violence such as those urged
by Prof. John Dewey. In dealing with those who contend that the end
justifies the means is morally perverted doctrine, Dewey has rightly
asked what can justify the means if not the end ? It is only the end
that can justify the means.
Buddha would have probably admitted that it is only the end which
would justify the means. What else could ? And he would have said
that if the end justified violence, violence was a legitimate means for
the end in view. He certainly would not have exempted property owners
from force if force was the only means for that end. As we shall see his
means for the end were different. As prof. Dewey has pointed out that
violence is only another name for the use of force and although force
must be used for creative purposes a distinction between use of force as
energy and use of force as violence needs to be made. The achievement
of an end involves the destruction of many other ends which are integral
with the one that is sought to be, destroyed. Use of force must be so
regulated that it should save as many ends as possible in destroying the
evil one. Buddha’s Ahimsa was not as absolute as the Ahimsa preached
by Mahavira the founder of Jainism. He would have allowed force only
as energy. The Communists preach Ahimsa as an absolute principle. To
this the Buddha was deadly opposed.
As to Dictatorship the Buddha would have none of it. He was born
a democrat and he died a democart. At the time he lived there were
14 monarchical states and 4 republics. He belonged to the Sakyas and
the Sakya’s kingdom was a republic. He was extremely in love with
Vaishali which was his second home because it was a republic. Before
his Mahaparinirbban he spent his Varshavasa in Vaishali. After the
completion of his Varshavasa he decided to leave Vaishali and go
elsewhere as was his wont. After going some distance he looked back on Vaishali and said to Ananda. “This is the last look of Vaishali which
the Tathagata is having”. So fond was he of this republic.
He was a thorough equalitarian. Originally the Bhikkus, including the
Buddha himself, wore robes made of rags. This rule was enunciated to
prevent the aristocratic classes from joining the Sangh. Later Jeevaka
the great physician prevailed upon the Buddha to accept a robe which
was made of a whole cloth. The Buddha at once altered the rule and
extended it to all the monks.
Once the Buddha’s mother Mahaprajapati Gotami who had joined the
Bhikkuni Sangh heard that the Buddha had got a chill. She at once
started preparing a scarf for him. After having completed it she took
to the Buddha and asked him to wear it. But he refused to accept it
saying that if it is a gift it must be a gift to the whole Sangh and not
to an individual member of the Sangh. She pleaded and pleaded but he
refused to yield.
The Bhikshu Sangh had the most democratic constitution. He was
only one of the Bhikkus. At the most he was like a Prime Minister
among members of the Cabinet. He was never a dictator. Twice before
his death he was asked to appoint some one as the head of the Sangh
to control it. But each time he refused saying that the Dhamma is the
Supreme Commander of the Sangh. He refused to be a dictator and
refused to appoint a dictator.
What about the value of the means? Whose means are superior and
lasting in the long run?
Can the Communists say that in achieving their valuable end they
have not destroyed other valuable ends? They have destroyed private
property. Assuming that this is a valuable end can the Communists
say that they have not destroyed other valuable end in the process of
achieving it? How many people have they killed for achieving their end.
Has human life no value ? Could they not have taken property without
taking the life of the owner?
Take dictatorship. The end of Dictatorship is to make the Revolution
a permanent revolution. This is a valuable end. But can the Communists
say that in achieving this end they have not destroyed other valuable
ends ? Dictatorship is often defined as absence of liberty or absence of
Parliamentary Government. Both interpretations are not quite clear.
There is no liberty even when there is Parliamentary Government.
For law means want of liberty. The difference between Dictatorship
and Parliamentary Govt. lies in this. In Parliamentary Government
every citizen has a right to criticise the restraint on liberty imposed
by the Government. In Parliamentary Government you have a duty and a right; the duty to obey the law and right to critise it.
In Dictatorship you have only duty to obey but no right to criticise it.
We must now consider whose means are more lasting. One has
to chose between Government by force and Government by moral
disposition.
As Burke has said force cannot be a lasting means. In his speech
on conciliation with America he uttered this memorable warning :
“First, Sir, permit me to observe, that the use of force alone is but
temporary. It may subdue for a moment; but it does not remove the
necessity of subduing again; and a nation is not governed which is
perpetually to be conquered.”
“My next objection is its uncertainty. Terror is not always the effect
of force, and an armament is not a victory. If you do not succeed, you
are without resource, for, conciliation failing, force remains; but force
failing, no further hope of reconciliation is left. Power and authority
are sometimes bought by kindness; but they can never be begged as
alms by an impoverised and defeated violence.
A further objection to force is, that you impair the object by your very
endeavours to preserve it. The thing you fought for is the thing which
you recover, but depreciated, sunk, wasted and consumed in the contest.”
In a sermon addressed to the Bhikkus the Buddha has shown the
difference between the rule by Righteousness and Rule by law i.e.
force. Addressing the Brethren he said :
(2) Long long ago, brethren, there was Sovereign overlord named
Strongtyre, a king ruling in righteousness, lord of the four quarters of
the earth, conqueror, the protector of his people. He was the possessor
of the celestial wheel. He lived in supremacy over this earth to its
ocean bounds, having conquered it, not by the courage, not by the
sword, but by righteousness.
(3) Now, brethren, after many years, after many hundred years, after
manu thousand years, king Strongtyre command a certain man, saying:
“Thou shouldest see. Sir, the Celestial Wheel has sunk a little, has
slipped down from its place, bring me word.”
Now after many many hundred years had slipped down from its
place On seeing this he went to King Strongtyre and said: “Know,
sire, for a truth that the Celestial Wheel has sunk, has slipped down
from its place.”
The king Strongtyre, brethren, let the prince his eldest son be sent
for and spake thus:
‘Behold, dear boy, my Celestial Wheel has sunk a little, has slipped
down from its place. Now it has been told me; If the Celestial Wheel of a
wheel turning King shall sink down, shall slip down from its place, that
king has not much longer to live. I have had my fill of human pleasures;
‘It’s time to seek after divine joys, Come, dear boy, take thou charge over
this earth bounded by the ocean. But I, shaving hair and beard, and
donning yellow robes, will go forth from home into the homeless state.
So brethren, King Strongtyre, having in due form established his
eldest son on the throne, shaved hair and beared, donned yellow robes
and went forth from home into homeless state. But on the seventh day
after the royal hermit had gone forth, the Celestial Wheel disappeared.
(4) Then a certain man went to the King, and told him, saying: Know,
O King, for a truth, that the Celestial Wheel has disappeared !
Then that King, brethren, was grieved thereat and afflicted with
sorrow. And he went to the royal hermit, and told him, saying: Know,
sire, for a truth, that the Celestial Wheel has disappeared.
And the anointed king so saying, the royal hermit made reply. Grieve
thou not, dear son, that the Celestial Wheel has disappeared, nor be
afflicted that the Celestial Wheel has disappeared. For no paternal
heritage of thine, dear son, is the Celestial Wheel. But verily, dear son,
turn thou in the Ariyan turning of the Wheel-turners. (Act up to the
noble ideal of duty set before themselves by the true sovereigns of the
world). Then it may well be that if thou carry out the Ariyan duty of
a Wheel-turning Monarch, and on the feast of the moon thou wilt for,
with bathed head to keep the feast on the chief upper terrace, to the
Celestial Wheel will manifest, itself with its thousand spokes its tyre,
navel and all its part complete.
(5) ‘But what, sire is this Ariya duty of a Wheel-turning Monarch?’
This, dear son, that thou, leaning on the Norm (the law of truth and
righteousness) honouring, respecting and revering it, doing homage to
it, hallowing it, being thyself a Norm-banner, a Norm-signal, having
the Norm as thy master, shouldest provide the right watch, ward, and
protection for thine own folk, for the army, for the nobles, for vassals,
for brahmins and house holders, for town and country dwellers, for the
religious world, and for beasts and birds. Throughout thy kingdom let
no wrong doing prevail. And whosoever in thy kingdom is poor, to him
let wealth be given.
‘And when dear son, in thy kingdom men of religious life,
renouncing the carelessness arising from intoxication of the senses, and devoted to forbearance and sympathy, each mastering self, each claiming
self, each protecting self, shall come to thee from time to time, and
question thee concerning what is good and what is bad, what is criminal
and what is not, what is to be done and what is to be left undone, what
line of action will in the long run work for weal or for woe, thou shouldest
hear what they have to say and thou shouldest deter them from evil,
and bid them take up what is good. This, dear son, is the Ariyan duty
of a sovereign of the world.’
‘Even so,’ sire, answered the anointed king, and obeying, carried out
the Ariyan duty of a sovereign lord. To him, thus behaving, when on
the feast of the full moon he had gone in the observance with bathed
head to the chief upper terrance the Celestial Wheel revealed itself, with
its thousand spokes, its tyre, its naval, and all its part complete. And
seeing this is occured to the king: ‘It has been told me that a king to
whom on such a occasion the Celestial Wheel reveals itself completely,
becomes a Wheel-turning monarch. May I even I also become a sovereign
of the world.’
(6) Then brethren, the king arose from his seat and uncovering his
robe from one shoulder, took in his left hand a pitcher, and with his
right hand sprinkled up over the Celestial Wheel, saying: ‘Roll onward,
O Lord Wheel! Go forth and overcome, O Lord Wheel!’
Then, brethern, the Celestial Wheel rolled onwards towards the region
of the East, and after it went the Wheel-turning king, and with him
his army, horses and chariots and elephants and men. And in whatever
place, brethren, the wheel stopped, there the king, the victorious warlord, took up his abode, and with him his fourfold army. Then the all,
the rival kings in the region of the East came to the sovereign king
and said ‘Come, O mighty king! Welcome, O mighty king! All is thine,
O mighty King! Teach us, O mighty king!’
The king, the sovereign war-lord, spake thus: ‘Ye shall slay no living
thing. Ye shall not take that which has not been given. Ye shall not act
wrongly touching bodily desires. Ye shall speak no lie. Ye shall drink no
maddening drink. Enjoy your possessions as you have been want to do.’
(7) Then, brethern, the Celestial Wheel, plunging down to the Eastern
ocean, rose up out again, and rolled onwards to the region of the south….
(and there all happened as had happend in the East). And in like manner
the Celestial Wheel, plunging into Southern ocean, rose up out again and
rolled onward to the region of the West... and of the North; and there
too happened as had happened in the Southern and West.
Then when the Celestial Wheel had gone forth conquering over the
whole earth to its ocean boundry, it returned to the royal city, and
stood, so that one might think it fixed, in front of the judgement hall at
entrance to the inner apartments of the king, the Wheel-turner, lighting
up with its glory the facade of the inner apartments of the king, the
sovereign of the world.
(8) And a second king, brethern, also a Wheel-turning monarch;... and
a third... and a fourth... and a fifth... and a sixth... and a seventh king,
a victorious war-lord, after many years, after many hundred years, after
many thousand years, command a certain man, saying :
‘If thou should’est see, sirrah, that the Celestial Wheel has sunk down,
has slid from its place, bring me word.’
‘Even so, sire,’ replied the man.
So after many years, after many hundred years, after many thousand
years, that man saw that the Celestial Wheel had sunk down, had
become dislodged from its place. And so seeing he went to the king, the
war-lord, and told him.
Then that king did (even as Strongtyre had done). And on the seventh
day after the royal hermit had gone forth the Celestial Wheel disappeared.
Then a certain man went and told the King. Then the King was
grieved at the disappearance of the wheel, and afflicted with grief. But
he did not go to the hermit-king to ask concerning the Ariyan Duty of
sovereign war-lord. But his own ideas, forsooth, he governed his people;
and they so governed differently from what they had been, did not prosper
as they used to do under former kings who had carried out the Arivan
duty of a sovereign king.
Then, brethren, the ministers and courtiers, the finance officials, the
guards and door keepers and they who lived by sacred verses came to
the King and spake thus :
‘Thy people, O king, whilst thou governest them by thine own ideas,
differently from the way to which they were used when former kings
were carrying out the Arivan Duty prosper not. Now there are in thy
kingdom ministers and courtiers, finance officers, guards and custodians,
and they who live by sacred verses—both all of us and others—who keep
the knowledge of the Ariyan duty of the sovereign king. Lo ! O king, do
thou ask us concerning it; to thee thus asking will we declare it.’
9. Then, brethren, the king, having made the ministers and all the
rest sit down together, asked them about the Ariyan duty of Sovereign
war-lord, And they declared it unto him. And when he had heard them, he did provide the due watch and ward protection, but on the
destitute he bestowed no wealth and because this was not done, poverty
became widespread.
When poverty was thus become rife, a certain man took that which
others had not given him, what people call by theft. Him they caught, and
brought before the king, saying: ‘This man, O king has taken that which
was not given to him and that is theft’.
Thereupon the king spake thus to the man. ‘Is it true sirrah, that thou
hast taken what no man gave thee, hast committed what men call theft.’
‘It is ture, O king.’
‘But why?’.
‘O king, I have nothing to keep me alive.’ Then the king bestowed wealth
on that man, saying: ‘With this wealth sir, do thou both keep thyself alive,
maintain thy parents, maintain children and wife, carry on thy business.’
‘Even so, O king,’ replied the man.
10. Now another man, brethern, took by theft what was not given him.
Him they caught and brought before the king and told him, saying: ‘this
man, O king, hath taken by theft what was not given him’.
And the king (spoke and did even as he had spoken and done to the
former man.)
11. Now men heard brethren, that to them who had taken by theft
what was not given them, the King was giving wealth. And hearing they
thought, let us then take by theft what has not been given us.
Now a certain man did so. And him they caught and charged before the
king who (as before) asked him why he had stolen.
‘Because, O king I cannot maintain myself ’.
Then the king thought: If I bestow wealth on anyone so ever who has
taken by theft what was not given him, there will be hereby and increase
of this stealing. Let me now put final stop to this and inflict condign
punishment on him, have his head cut off!
So he bade his man saying: ‘Now look ye! bind this man’s arms behind
him with a strong rope and tight knot, shave his head bald, lead him around
with a harsh sounding drum, from road to road, from cross ways to cross
ways, take him out by the southern gate and to the south of the town,
put a final stop to this, inflict on him uttermost penalty, cut of his head.’
‘Even so , O king’ answered the men, and carried out his commands.
12. Now men heard, brethren, that they who took by theft what was
not given them were thus put to death. And hearing they thought:Let us also now have sharp swords made ready for themselves, and
them from whom we take what is not given us—what they call them—
let us put a final stop to them, inflict on them uttermost penalty, and
their heads off.
And they got themselves sharp swords, and came forth to sack village
and town and city, and to work highway robbery. And then whom they
robbed they made an end of, cutting off their heads.
13. Thus, brethren, from goods not being bestowed on the destitute
poverty grieve rife; from poverty growing rife stealing increased, from
the spread of stealing violence grew space, from the growth of violence
the destruction of life common, from the frequency of murder both the
span of life in those beings and their comeliness also (diminished).
Now among humans of latter span of life, brethren, a certain took
by theft what was not given him and even as those others was accused
before the king and questioned if it was true that he had stolen.
‘Nay, O king,’ he replied, ‘they are delibarately telling lies.’
14. Thus from goods not being bestowed on the destitute, poverty grew
rife... stealing... violence... murder... until lying grew common.
Again a certain man reported to the king, saying: ‘such and such
a man, O king! has taken by theft what was not given him’ —thus
speaking evil of him.
15. And so, brethren, from goods not being bestowed on the destitute
poverty grew rife... stealing... violence... murder... lying... evil speaking
grew abundant.
16. From lying there grew adultery.
17. Thus from goods not being bestowed on the destitute, poverty...
stealing... violence... murder... lying... rvil speaking... immorality grew rife.
18. Among (them) brethren, three things grew space incest, wanton
greed and perverted lust.
Then these things grew apace lack of filial piety to mother and father,
lack of religious piety to holy men, lack of regard for the head of the clan.
19. There will come a time, brethren, when the descendants of those
humans will have a life-span of ten years. Among humans of this lifespan, maidens of five years will be of a marriageable age. Among such
humans these kinds of tastes (savours) will disappear; ghee, butter,
oil of tila, sugar, salt. Among such humans kudrusa grain will be
the highest kind of food. Even as to-day rice and curry is the highest
kind of food, so will kudrusa grain will be then. Among such humans
the ten moral courses of conduct will altogether disappear, the ten
immoral courses of action will flourish excessively; there will be no word
for moral among such humans, the ten moral courses of conduct will
altogether disappear, the ten immoral courses of action will flourish
excessively, there will be no word for moral among such humans—far
less any moral agent. Among such humans, brethren, they who lack filian
and religious piety, and show no respect for the Head of the clan—’tis
they to whom homage and praise will be given, just as to-day homage
and praise are given to the filial minded, to the pious and to them who
respect the heads of their clans.
20. Among such humans, brethren, there will be no (such thoughts of
reverence as are a bar to intermarriage with) mother, or mother’s sister,
or mother’s sister-in-law, or teacher’s wife, or father’s sister-in-law. The
world will fall into promiscuity, like goats and sheep, fowls and swine,
dogs and jackals.
Among such humans, brethren keen mutual enmity will become the
rule, keen ill-will, keen animosity, passionate thoughts even of killing,
in a mother towards her child, in a child towards its father, in brother
to brother, in brother to sister, in sister to brother. Just a sportsman
feels towards the game that he sees, so will they feel.
This is probably the finest picture of what happens when moral force
fails and brutal force takes its place. What the Buddha wanted was that
each man should be morally so trained that he may himself become a
sentinal for the kingdom of righteousness.