SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TITLE: Castes in India: Their Mechanism, Genesis and Development
TYPE: Academic Paper
YEAR: 1916
CONTEXT: Anthropological analysis of caste system

Let us see what our imaginary group is likely to do with this surplus man
and surplus woman. We will first take up the case of the surplus woman. She can be disposed of in two different ways so as to preserve the endogamy
of the Caste.
First: burn her on the funeral pyre of her deceased husband and get
rid of her. This, however, is rather an impracticable way of solving the
problem of sex disparity. In some cases it may work, in others it may not.
Consequently every surplus woman cannot thus be disposed of, because it
is an easy solution but a hard realization. And so the surplus woman (=
widow), if not disposed of, remains in the group : but in her very existence
lies a double danger. She may marry outside the Caste and violate endogamy,
or she may marry within the Caste and through competition encroach upon
the chances of marriage that must be reserved for the potential brides in
the Caste. She is therefore a menance in any case, and something must
be done to her if she cannot be burned along with her deceased husband.
The second remedy is to enforce widowhood on her for the rest of her life.
So far as the objective results are concerned, burning is a better solution
than enforcing widowhood. Burning the widow eliminates all the three evils
that a surplus woman is fraught with. Being dead and gone she creates no
problem of remarriage either inside or outside the Caste. But compulsory
widowhood is superior to burning because it is more practicable. Besides
being comparatively humane it also guards against the evils of remarriage
as does burning; but it fails to guard the morals of the group. No doubt
under compulsory widowhood the woman remains, and just because she is
deprived of her natural right of being a legitimate wife in future, the incentive
to immoral conduct is increased. But this is by no means an insuperable
difficulty. She can be degraded to a condition in which she is no longer a
source of allurement.
The problem of surplus man (= widower) is much more important and
much more difficult than that of the surplus woman in a group that desires
to make itself into a Caste. From time immemorial man as compared with
woman has had the upper hand. He is a dominant figure in every group
and of the two sexes has greater prestige. With this traditional superiority
of man over woman his wishes have always been consulted. Woman, on the
other hand, has been an easy prey to all kinds of iniquitous injunctions,
religious, social or economic. But man as a maker of injunctions is most
often above them all. Such being the case, you cannot accord the same kind
of treatment to a surplus man as you can to a surplus woman in a Caste.
The project of burning him with his deceased wife is hazardous in two
ways : first of all it cannot be done, simply because he is a man. Secondly,
if done, a sturdy soul is lost to the Caste. There remain then only two
solutions which can conveniently dispose of him. I say conveniently, because
he is an asset to the group. Important as he is to the group, endogamy is still more important, and
the solution must assure both these ends. Under these circumstances he
may be forced or I should say induced, after the manner of the widow, to
remain a widower for the rest of his life. This solution is not altogether
difficult, for without any compulsion some are so disposed as to enjoy selfimposed celibacy, or even to take a further step of their own accord and
renounce the world and its joys. But, given human nature as it is, this
solution can hardly be expected to be realized. On the other hand, as is
very likely to be the case, if the surplus man remains in the group as an
active participator in group activities, he is a danger to the morals of the
group. Looked at from a different point of view celibacy, though easy in
cases where it succeeds, is not so advantageous even then to the material
prospects of the Caste. If he observes genuine celibacy and renounces the
world, he would not be a menace to the preservation of Caste endogamy or
Caste morals as he undoubtedly would be if he remained a secular person.
But as an ascetic celibate he is as good as burned, so far as the material
well-being of his Caste is concerned. A Caste, in order that it may be large
enough to afford a vigorous communal life, must be maintained at a certain
numerical strength. But to hope for this and to proclaim celibacy is the same
as trying to cure atrophy by bleeding.
Imposing celibacy on the surplus man in the group, therefore, fails both
theoretically and practically. It is in the interest of the Caste to keep him
as a Grahastha (one who raises a family), to use a Sanskrit technical term.
But the problem is to provide him with a wife from within the Caste. At
the outset this is not possible, for the ruling ratio in a caste has to be one
man to one woman and none can have two chances of marriage, for in a
Caste thoroughly self-enclosed there are always just enough marriageable
women to go round for the marriageable men. Under these circumstances
the surplus man can be provided with a wife only by recruiting a bride
from the ranks of those not yet marriageable in order to tie him down to
the group. This is certainly the best of the possible solutions in the case
of the surplus man. By this, he is kept within the Caste. By this means
numerical depletion through constant outflow is guarded against, and by
this endogamy morals are preserved.
It will now be seen that the four means by which numerical disparity
between the two sexes is conveniently maintained are : (1) burning the widow
with her deceased husband ; (2) compulsory widowhood—a milder form of
burning ; (3) imposing celibacy on the widower and (4) wedding him to a girl
not yet marriageable. Though, as I said above, burning the widow and imposing
celibacy on the widower are of doubtful service to the group in its endeavour
to preserve its endogamy, all of them operate as means. But means, as forces,
when liberated or set in motion create an end. What then is the end that
these means create ? They create and perpetuate endogamy, while caste and endogamy, according to our analysis of the various definitions of caste, are
one and the same thing. Thus the existence of these means is identical with
caste and caste involves these means.
This, in my opinion, is the general mechanism of a caste in a system of
castes. Let us now turn from these high generalities to the castes in Hindu
Society and inquire into their mechanism. I need hardly premise that there
are a great many pitfalls in the path of those who try to unfold the past,
and caste in India to be sure is a very ancient institution. This is especially
true where there exist no authentic or written records or where the people,
like the Hindus, are so constituted that to them writing history is a folly,
for the world is an illusion. But institutions do live, though for a long time
they may remain unrecorded and as often as not customs and morals are
like fossils that tell their own history. If this is true, our task will be amply
rewarded if we scrutinize the solution the Hindus arrived at to meet the
problems of the surplus man and surplus woman.
Complex though it be in its general working the Hindu Society, even to
a superficial observer, presents three singular uxorial customs, namely :
 (i) Sati or the burning of the widow on the funeral pyre of her deceased
husband.
 (ii) Enforced widowhood by which a widow is not allowed to remarry.
 (iii) Girl marriage.
In addition, one also notes a great hankering after Sannyasa (renunciation)
on the part of the widower, but this may in some cases be due purely to
psychic disposition.
So far as I know, no scientific explanation of the origin of these customs
is forthcoming even today. We have plenty of philosophy to tell us why these
customs were honoured, but nothing to tell us the causes of their origin and
existence. Sati has been honoured because it is a “proof of the perfect unity of body and soul” between husband
and wife and of “devotion beyond the grave”, because it embodied the ideal
of wifehood, which is well expressed by Uma when she said, “Devotion to her
Lord is woman’s honour, it is her eternal heaven : and O Maheshvara”, she
adds with a most touching human cry, “I desire not paradise itself if thou
are not satisfied with me !” Why compulsory widowhood is honoured I know
not, nor have I yet met with any one who sang in praise of it, though there
are a great many who adhere to it. The eulogy in honour of girl marriage is
reported by Dr. Ketkar to be as follows : “A really faithful man or woman
ought not to feel affection for a woman or a man other than the one with
whom he or she is united. Such purity is compulsory not only after marriage,
but even before marriage, for that is the only correct ideal of chastity. No
maiden could be considered pure if she feels love for a man other than the one to whom she might be married. As she does not know to whom she is going
to be married, she must not feel affection for any man at all before marriage.
If she does so, it is a sin. So it is better for a girl to know whom she has
to love before any sexual consciousness has been awakened in her.” Hence
girl marriage.