SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TITLE: Castes in India: Their Mechanism, Genesis and Development
TYPE: Academic Paper
YEAR: 1916
CONTEXT: Anthropological analysis of caste system


Many of us, I dare say, have witnessed local, national or international
expositions of material objects that make up the sum total of human
civilization. But few can entertain the idea of there being such a thing as
an exposition of human institutions. Exhibition of human institutions is a
strange idea ; some might call it the wildest of ideas. But as students of
Ethnology I hope you will not be hard on this innovation, for it is not so,
and to you at least it should not be strange.
You all have visited, I believe, some historic place like the ruins of Pompeii,
and listened with curiosity to the history of the remains as it flowed from the
glib tongue of the guide. In my opinion a student of Ethnology, in one sense
at least, is much like the guide. Like his prototype, he holds up (perhaps
with more seriousness and desire of self-instruction) the social institutions
to view, with all the objectiveness humanly possible, and inquires into their
origin and function.
Most of our fellow students in this Seminar, which concerns itself with
primitive versus modern society, have ably acquitted themselves along
these lines by giving lucid expositions of the various institutions, modern
or primitive, in which they are interested. It is my turn now, this evening,
to entertain you, as best I can, with a paper on “Castes in India : Their
mechanism, genesis and development”
I need hardly remind you of the complexity of the subject I intend to
handle. Subtler minds and abler pens than mine have been brought to the
task of unravelling the mysteries of Caste ; but unfortunately it still remains
in the domain of the “unexplained”, not to say of the “un-understood” I am
quite alive to the complex intricacies of a hoary institution like Caste, but I
am not so pessimistic as to relegate it to the region of the unknowable, for
I believe it can be known. The caste problem is a vast one, both theoretically
and practically. Practically, it is an institution that portends tremendous
consequences. It is a local problem, but one capable of much wider mischief,
for “as long as caste in India does exist, Hindus will hardly intermarry or
have any social intercourse with outsiders ; and if Hindus migrate to other
regions on earth, Indian caste would become a world problem.” Theoretically, 
it has defied a great many scholars who have taken upon themselves, as a labour of love, 
to dig into its origin. Such being the case, I cannot treat the problem in its entirety. 
Time, space and acumen, I am afraid, would all fail me, if I attempted to do otherwise 
than limit myself to a phase of it, namely, the genesis, mechanism and spread of the caste system. I will
strictly observe this rule, and will dwell on extraneous matters only when
it is necessary to clarify or support a point in my thesis.
To proceed with the subject. According to well-known ethnologists, the
population of India is a mixture of Aryans, Dravidians, Mongolians and
Scythians. All these stocks of people came into India from various directions
and with various cultures, centuries ago, when they were in a tribal state.
They all in turn elbowed their entry into the country by fighting with their
predecessors, and after a stomachful of it settled down as peaceful neighbours.
Through constant contact and mutual intercourse they evolved a common
culture that superseded their distinctive cultures. It may be granted that
there has not been a thorough amalgamation of the various stocks that make
up the peoples of India, and to a traveller from within the boundaries of
India the East presents a marked contrast in physique and even in colour
to the West, as does the South to the North. But amalgamation can never
be the sole criterion of homogeneity as predicated of any people. Ethnically
all people are heterogeneous. It is the unity of culture that is the basis of
homogeneity. Taking this for granted, I venture to say that there is no country
that can rival the Indian Peninsula with respect to the unity of its culture.
It has not only a geographic unity, but it has over and above all a deeper
and a much more fundamental unity—the indubitable cultural unity that
covers the land from end to end. But it is because of this homogeneity that
Caste becomes a problem so difficult to be explained. If the Hindu Society
were a mere federation of mutually exclusive units, the matter would be
simple enough. But Caste is a parcelling of an already homogeneous unit,
and the explanation of the genesis of Caste is the explanation of this process
of parcelling.
Before launching into our field of enquiry, it is better to advise ourselves
regarding the nature of a caste I will therefore draw upon a few of the best
students of caste for their definitions of it:
 (1) Mr. Senart, a French authority, defines a caste as “a close corporation,
in theory at any rate rigorously hereditary : equipped with a certain
traditional and independent organisation, including a chief and a
council, meeting on occasion in assemblies of more or less plenary 
authority and joining together at certain festivals : bound together
by common occupations, which relate more particularly to marriage
and to food and to questions of ceremonial pollution, and ruling its
members by the exercise of jurisdiction, the extent of which varies,
but which succeeds in making the authority of the community more
felt by the sanction of certain penalties and, above all, by final
irrevocable exclusion from the group”.
(2) Mr. Nesfield defines a caste as “a class of the community which disowns
any connection with any other class and can neither intermarry nor
eat nor drink with any but persons of their own community”.
(3) According to Sir H. Risley, “a caste may be defined as a collection of
families or groups of families bearing a common name which usually
denotes or is associated with specific occupation, claiming common
descent from a mythical ancestor, human or divine, professing to
follow the same professional callings and are regarded by those who
are competent to give an opinion as forming a single homogeneous
community”.
(4) Dr. Ketkar defines caste as “a social group having two characteristics :
(i) membership is confined to those who are born of members and
includes all persons so born ; (ii) the members are forbidden by an
inexorable social law to marry outside the group”.
To review these definitions is of great importance for our purpose. It will
be noticed that taken individually the definitions of three of the writers
include too much or too little : none is complete or correct by itself and all
have missed the central point in the mechanism of the Caste system. Their
mistake lies in trying to define caste as an isolated unit by itself, and not
as a group within, and with definite relations to, the system of caste as a
whole. Yet collectively all of them are complementary to one another, each
one emphasising what has been obscured in the other. By way of criticism,
therefore, I will take only those points common to all Castes in each of the
above definitions which are regarded as peculiarities of Caste and evaluate
them as such.
To start with Mr. Senart. He draws attention to the “idea of pollution”
as a characteristic of Caste. With regard to this point it may be safely said
that it is by no means a peculiarity of Caste as such. It usually originates
in priestly ceremonialism and is a particular case of the general belief in
purity. Consequently its necessary connection with Caste may be completely
denied without damaging the working of Caste. The “idea of pollution” has
been attached to the institution of Caste, only because the Caste that enjoys
the highest rank is the priestly Caste : while we know that priest and purity
are old associates. We may therefore conclude that the “idea of pollution”
is a characteristic of Caste only in so far as Caste has a religious flavour.