SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TITLE: Castes in India: Their Mechanism, Genesis and Development
TYPE: Academic Paper
YEAR: 1916
CONTEXT: Anthropological analysis of caste system

The question may be asked whether these nuclei do not exist in other
societies and whether they are peculiar to India. If they are not peculiar to
India, but are common to the world, why is it that they did not “form” caste
on other parts of this planet ? Is it because those parts are holier than the
land of the Vedas, or that the professors are mistaken ? I am afraid that
the latter is the truth.
In spite of the high theoretic value claimed by the several authors for
their respective theories based on one or other of the above nuclei, one
regrets to say that on close examination they are nothing more than filling
illustrations— what Matthew Arnold means by “the grand name without
the grand thing in it”. Such are the various theories of caste advanced by
Sir Denzil Ibbetson, Mr. Nesfield, Mr. Senart and Sir H. Risley. To criticise
them in a lump would be to say that they are a disguised form of the Petitio
Principii of formal logic. To illustrate : Mr. Nesfield says that “function and
function only. .. was the foundation upon which the whole system of Castes
in India was built up”. But he may rightly be reminded that he does not very
much advance our thought by making the above statement, which practically
amounts to saying that castes in India are functional or occupational, which
is a very poor discovery ! We have yet to know from Mr. Nesfield why is it
that an occupational group turned into an occupational caste ? I would very
cheerfully have undertaken the task of dwelling on the theories of other
ethnologists, had it not been for the fact that Mr. Nesfield’s is a typical one.
Without stopping to criticize those theories that explain the caste system
as a natural phenomenon occurring in obedience to the law of disintegration,
as explained by Herbert Spencer in his formula of evolution, or as natural
as “the structural differentiation within an organism”—to employ the
phraseology of orthodox apologists—, or as an early attempt to test the laws
of eugenics—as all belonging to the same class of fallacy which regards the
caste system as inevitable, or as being consciously imposed in anticipation
of these laws on a helpless and humble population, I will now lay before
you my own view on the subject.
We shall be well advised to recall at the outset that the Hindu society, in
common with other societies, was composed of classes and the earliest known are the (1) Brahmins or the priestly class ; (2) the Kshatriya, or the
military class ; (3) the Vaishya, or the merchant class and (4) the Shudra,
or the artisan and menial class. Particular attention has to be paid to the
fact that this was essentially a class system, in which individuals, when
qualified, could change their class, and therefore classes did change their
personnel. At some time in the history of the Hindus, the priestly class
socially detached itself from the rest of the body of people and through
a closed-door policy became a caste by itself. The other classes being
subject to the law of social division of labour underwent differentiation,
some into large, others into very minute groups. The Vaishya and Shudra
classes were the original inchoate plasm, which formed the sources of
the numerous castes of today. As the military occupation does not very
easily lend itself to very minute sub-division, the Kshatriya class could
have differentiated into soldiers and administrators.
This sub-division of a society is quite natural. But the unnatural thing
about these sub-divisions is that they have lost the open-door character
of the class system and have become self-enclosed units called castes.
The question is : were they compelled to close their doors and become
endogamous, or did they close them of their own accord ? I submit that
there is a double line of answer : Some closed the door : Others found it
closed against them. The one is a psychological interpretation and the
other is mechanistic, but they are complementary and both are necessary
to explain the phenomena of caste-formation in its entirety.
I will first take up the psychological interpretation. The question we
have to answer in this connection is : Why did these sub-divisions or
classes, if you please, industrial, religious or otherwise, become self enclosed or endogamous ? My answer is because the Brahmins were so.
Endogamy or the closed-door system, was a fashion in the Hindu society,
and as it had originated from the Brahmin caste it was whole-heartedly
imitated by all the non-Brahmin sub-divisions or classes, who, in their
turn, became endogamous castes. It is “the infection of imitation” that
caught all these sub-divisions on their onward march of differentiation
and has turned them into castes. The propensity to imitate is a deep-seated one in the human mind and need not be deemed an inadequate
explanation for the formation of the various castes in India. It is so
deep-seated that Walter Bagehot argues that, “We must not think of
. . . imitation as voluntary, or even conscious. On the contrary it has
its seat mainly in very obscure parts of the mind, whose notions, so far
from being consciously produced, are hardly felt to exist; so far from
being conceived beforehand, are not even felt at the time. The main
seat of the imitative part of our nature is our belief, and the causes
predisposing us to believe this or disinclining us to believe that are
among the obscurest parts of our nature. But as to the imitative nature of credulity there can be no doubt.” This propensity to imitate has been made
the subject of a scientific study by Gabriel Tarde, who lays down three laws
of imitation. One of his three laws is that imitation flows from the higher to
the lower or, to quote his own words, “Given the opportunity, a nobility will
always and everywhere imitate its leaders, its kings or sovereigns, and the
people likewise, given the opportunity, its nobility.” Another of Tarde’s laws
of imitation is : that the extent or intensity of imitation varies inversely in
proportion to distance, or in his own words “The thing that is most imitated
is the most superior one of those that are nearest. In fact, the influence
of the model’s example is efficacious inversely to its distance as well as
directly to its superiority. Distance is understood here in its sociological
meaning. However distant in space a stranger may be, he is close by, from
this point of view, if we have numerous and daily relations with him and
if we have every facility to satisfy our desire to imitate him. This law of
the imitation of the nearest, of the least distant, explains the gradual and
consecutive character of the spread of an example that has been set by the
higher social ranks.” In order to prove my thesis—which really needs no proof—that some castes were formed by imitation, the best way, it seems to me, is to find out whether
or not the vital conditions for the formation of castes by imitation exist in
the Hindu Society. The conditions for imitation, according to this standard
authority are : (1) that the source of imitation must enjoy prestige in the group
and (2) that there must be “numerous and daily relations” among members
of a group. That these conditions were present in India there is little reason
to doubt. The Brahmin is a semi-god and very nearly a demi-god. He sets
up a mode and moulds the rest. His prestige is unquestionable and is the
fountain-head of bliss and good. Can such a being, idolised by scriptures and
venerated by the priest-ridden multitude, fail to project his personality on
the suppliant humanity ? Why, if the story be true, he is believed to be the
very end of creation. Such a creature is worthy of more than mere imitation,
but at least of imitation ; and if he lives in an endogamous enclosure, should
not the rest follow his example ? Frail humanity! Be it embodied in a grave
philosopher or a frivolous housemaid, it succumbs. It cannot be otherwise.
Imitation is easy and invention is difficult.
Yet another way of demonstrating the play of imitation in the formation
of castes is to understand the attitude of non-Brahmin classes towards those
customs which supported the structure of caste in its nascent days until, in
the course of history, it became embedded in the Hindu mind and hangs there
to this day without any support—for now it needs no prop but belief—like a weed on the surface of a pond. In a way, but only in a way, the status of a
caste in the Hindu Society varies directly with the extent of the observance of
the customs of Sati, enforced widowhood, and girl marriage. But observance
of these customs varies directly with the distance (I am using the word in
the Tardian sense) that separates the caste. Those castes that are nearest
to the Brahmins have imitated all the three customs and insist on the strict
observance thereof. Those that are less near have imitated enforced widowhood
and girl marriage ; others, a little further off, have only girl marriage and
those furthest off have imitated only the belief in the caste principle. This
imperfect imitation, I dare say, is due partly to what Tarde calls “distance”
and partly to the barbarous character of these customs. This phenomenon
is a complete illustration of Tarde’s law and leaves no doubt that the whole
process of caste-formation in India is a process of imitation of the higher by
the lower. At this juncture I will turn back to support a former conclusion
of mine, which might have appeared to you as too sudden or unsupported.
I said that the Brahmin class first raised the structure of caste by the
help of those three customs in question. My reason for that conclusion was
that their existence in other classes was derivative. After what I have said
regarding the role of imitation in the spread of these customs among the
non-Brahmin castes, as means or as ideals, though the imitators have not
been aware of it, they exist among them as derivatives ; and, if they are
derived, there must have been prevalent one original caste that was high
enough to have served as a pattern for the rest. But in a theocratic society,
who could be the pattern but the servant of God ?