SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 1
TITLE: Castes in India: Their Mechanism, Genesis and Development
TYPE: Academic Paper
YEAR: 1916
CONTEXT: Anthropological analysis of caste system

This completes the story of those that were weak enough to close their
doors. Let us now see how others were closed in as a result of being closed out.
This I call the mechanistic process of the formation of caste. It is mechanistic
because it is inevitable. That this line of approach, as well as the psychological
one, to the explanation of the subject has escaped my predecessors is entirely
due to the fact that they have conceived caste as a unit by itself and not as
one within a System of Caste. The result of this oversight or lack of sight has
been very detrimental to the proper understanding of the subject matter and
therefore its correct explanation. I will proceed to offer my own explanation
by making one remark which I will urge you to bear constantly in mind. It
is this : that caste in the singular number is an unreality. Castes exist only
in the plural number. There is no such thing as a caste : There are always
castes. To illustrate my meaning : while making themselves into a caste, the
Brahmins, by virtue of this, created non-Brahmin caste; or, to express it in my
own way, while closing themselves in they closed others out. I will clear my
point by taking another illustration. Take India as a whole with its various
communities designated by the various creeds to which they owe allegiance,
to wit, the Hindus, Mohammedans, Jews, Christians and Parsis. Now,
barring the Hindus, the rest within themselves are non-caste communities.But with respect to each other they are castes. Again, if the first four enclose
themselves, the Parsis are directly closed out, but are indirectly closed in.
Symbolically, if Group A wants to be endogamous, Group B has to be so by
sheer force of circumstances.
Now apply the same logic to the Hindu society and you have another
explanation of the “fissiparous” character of caste, as a consequence of the
virtue of self-duplication that is inherent in it. Any innovation that seriously
antagonises the ethical, religious and social code of the Caste is not likely
to be tolerated by the Caste, and the recalcitrant members of a Caste are in
danger of being thrown out of the Caste, and left to their own fate without
having the alternative of being admitted into or absorbed by other Castes.
Caste rules are inexorable and they do not wait to make nice distinctions
between kinds of offence. Innovation may be of any kind, but all kinds
will suffer the same penalty. A novel way of thinking will create a new
Caste for the old ones will not tolerate it. The noxious thinker respectfully
called Guru (Prophet) suffers the same fate as the sinners in illegitimate
love. The former creates a caste of the nature of a religious sect and the
latter a type of mixed caste. Castes have no mercy for a sinner who has
the courage to violate the code. The penalty is excommunication and the
result is a new caste. It is not peculiar Hindu psychology that induces
the excommunicated to form themselves into a caste ; far from it. On the
contrary, very often they have been quite willing to be humble members of
some caste (higher by preference) if they could be admitted within its fold.
But castes are enclosed units and it is their conspiracy with clear conscience
that compels the excommunicated to make themselves into a caste. The logic
of this obdurate circumstance is merciless, and it is in obedience to its force
that some unfortunate groups find themselves enclosed, because others in
enclosing, themselves have closed them out, with the result that new groups
(formed on any basis obnoxious to the caste rules) by a mechanical law are
constantly being converted into castes to a bewildering multiplicity. Thus is
told the second tale in the process of Caste formation in India.
Now to summarise the main points of my thesis. In my opinion there
have been several mistakes committed by the students of Caste, which have
misled them in their investigations. European students of Caste have unduly
emphasised the role of colour in the Caste system. Themselves impregnated
by colour prejudices, they very readily imagined it to be the chief factor in the
Caste problem. But nothing can be farther from the truth, and Dr. Ketkar
is correct when he insists that “All the princes whether they belonged to the
so-called Aryan race, or the so-called Dravidian race, were Aryas. Whether
a tribe or a family was racially Aryan or Dravidian was a question which
never troubled the people of India, until foreign scholars came in and began
to draw the line. The colour of the skin had long ceased to be a matter of importance.”
Again, they have mistaken mere descriptions for explanation
and fought over them as though they were theories of origin. There are
occupational, religious etc., castes, it is true, but it is by no means an
explanation of the origin of Caste. We have yet to find out why occupational
groups are castes ; but this question has never even been raised. Lastly
they have taken Caste very lightly as though a breath had made it. On the
contrary, Caste, as I have explained it, is almost impossible to be sustained :
for the difficulties that it involves are tremendous. It is true that Caste
rests on belief, but before belief comes to be the foundation of an institution,
the institution itself needs to be perpetuated and fortified. My study of the
Caste problem involves four main points : (1) that in spite of the composite
make-up of the Hindu population, there is a deep cultural unity; (2) that
caste is a parcelling into bits of a larger cultural unit; (3) that there was
one caste to start with and (4) that classes have become Castes through
imitation and excommunication.
Peculiar interest attaches to the problem of Caste in India today; as
persistent attempts are being made to do away with this unnatural institution.
Such attempts at reform, however, have aroused a great deal of controversy
regarding its origin, as to whether it is due to the conscious command of
a Supreme Authority, or is an unconscious growth in the life of a human
society under peculiar circumstances. Those who hold the latter view will,
I hope, find some food for thought in the standpoint adopted in this paper.
Apart from its practical importance the subject of Caste is an all absorbing
problem and the interest aroused in me regarding its theoretic foundations
has moved me to put before you some of the conclusions, which seem to me
well founded, and the grounds upon which they may be supported. I am not,
however, so presumptuous as to think them in any way final, or anything
more than a contribution to a discussion of the subject. It seems to me that
the car has been shunted on wrong lines, and the primary object of the
paper is to indicate what I regard to be the right path of investigation, with
a view to arrive at a serviceable truth. We must, however, guard against
approaching the subject with a bias. Sentiment must be outlawed from the
domain of science and things should be judged from an objective standpoint.
For myself I shall find as much pleasure in a positive destruction of my own
idealogy, as in a rational disagreement on a topic, which, notwithstanding
many learned disquisitions is likely to remain controversial forever. To
conclude, while I am ambitious to advance a Theory of Caste, if it can be
shown to be untenable I shall be equally willing to give it up.