SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 3
TITLE: Buddha or Karl Marx
TYPE: Philosophical Treatise / Comparative Ideological Analysis

The Communists themselves admit that their theory of the State as
a permanent dictatorship is a weakness in their political philosophy.
They take shelter under the plea that the State will ultimately wither
away. There are two questions which they have to answer. When will
it wither away ? What will take the place of the State when it withers
away? To the first question they can give no definite time. Dictatorship
for a short period may be good and a welcome thing even for making
Democracy safe. Why should not Dictatorship liquidate itself after it
has done its work, after it has removed all the obstacles and boulders
in the way of democracy and has made the path of Democracy safe. Did
not Asoka set an example ? He practised violence against the Kalingas.
But thereafter he renounced violence completely. If our victors to-day
not only disarm their victims but also disarm themselves there would
be peace all over the world.
The Communists have given no answer. At any rate no satisfactory
answer to the question what would take the place of the State when
it withers away, though this question is more important than the question when the State will wither away. Will it be succeded by Anarchy ?
If so the building up of the Communist State is an useless effort. If it
cannot be sustained except by force and if it results in anarchy when
the force holding it together is withdrawn what good is the Communist
State.
The only thing which could sustain it after force is withdrawn is
Religion. But to the Communists Religion is anathema. Their hatred to
Religion is so deep seated that they will not even discriminate between
religions which are helpful to Communism and religions which are not.
The Communists have carried their hatred of Christianity to Buddhism
without waiting to examine the difference between the two. The charge
against Christianity levelled by the Communists was two-fold. Their
first charge against Christianity was that they made people other
worldliness and made them suffer poverty in this world. As can be seen
from quotations from Buddhism in the earlier part of this tract such a
charge cannot be levelled against Buddhism.
The second charge levelled by the Communists against Christianity
cannot be levelled against Buddhism. This charge is summed up in
the statement that Religion is the opium of the people. This charge
is based upon the Sermon on the Mount which is to be found in the
Bible. The Sermon on the Mount sublimates poverty and weakness. It
promises heaven to the poor and the weak. There is no Sermon on the
Mount to be found in the Buddha’s teachings. His teaching is to acquire
wealth. I give below his Sermon on the subject to Anathapindika one
of his disciples.
Once Anathapindika came to where the Exalted One was staying.
Having come he made obeisance to the Exalted One and took a seat
at one side and asked ‘Will the Enlightened One tell what things are
welcome, pleasant, agreeable, to the householder but which are hard
to gain.’
The Enlightened One having heard the question put to him said ‘Of
such things the first is to acquire wealth lawfully.’
‘The second is to see that your relations also get their wealth lawfully.’
‘The third is to live long and reach great age.’
‘Of a truth, householder, for the attainment of these four things, which
in the world are welcome, pleasant agreeable but hard to gain, there
are also four conditions precedent. They are the blessing of faith, the
blessing of virtuous conduct, the blessing of liberality and the blessing
of wisdom. The Blessing of virtuous conduct which abstains from taking life,
thieving, unchastity, lying and partaking of fermented liquor.
The blessing of liberality consists in the householder living with mind
freed from the taint of avarice, generous, open-handed, delightening in
gifts, a good one to be asked and devoted to the distribution of gifts.
Wherein consists the blessing of Widsom? He know that an householder
who dwells with mind overcome by greed, avarice, ill-will, sloth,
drowsiness, distraction and flurry, and also about, commits wrongful
deeds and neglects that which ought to be done, and by so doing deprived
of happiness and honour.
Greed, avarice, ill-will, sloth and drowsiness, distraction and flurry
and doubt are stains of the mind. An householder who gets rid of such
stains of the mind acquires great wisdom, abundant wisdom, clear vision
and perfect wisdom.
Thus to acquire wealth legitimately and justly, earn by great industry,
amassed by strength of the arm and gained by sweat of the brow is a
great blessing. The householder makes himself happy and cheerful and
preserves himself full of happines; also makes his parents, wife, and
children, servants, and labourers, friends and companions happy and
cheerful, and preserves them full of happiness.
The Russians do not seem to be paying any attention to Buddhism
as an ultimate aid to sustain Communism when force is withdrawn.
The Russians are proud of their Communism. But they forget that the
wonder of all wonders is that the Buddha established Communism so
far as the Sangh was concerned without dictatorship. It may be that it
was a communism on a very small scale but it was communism without
dictatorship a miracle which Lenin failed to do.
The Buddha’s method was different. His method was to change the
mind of man: to alter his disposition: so that whatever man does, he
does it voluntarily without the use of force or compulsion. His main
means to alter the disposition of men was his Dhamma and the constant
preaching of his Dhamma. The Buddhas way was not to force people to
do what they did not like to do although it was good for them. His way
was to alter the disposition of men so that they would do voluntarily
what they would not otherwise to do.
It has been claimed that the Communist Dictatorship in Russia
has wonderful achievements to its credit. There can be no denial
of it. That is why I say that a Russian Dictatorship would be good
for all backward countries. But this is no argument for permanent
Dictatorship. Humanity does not only want economic values, it also
wants spiritual values to be retained. Permanent Dictatorship has paid no attention to spiritual values and does not seem to intend to. Carlyle
called Political Economy a Pig Philosophy. Carlyle was of course wrong.
For man needs material comforts. But the Communist Philosophy seems
to be equally wrong for the aim of their philosophy seems to be fatten
pigs as though men are no better than pigs. Man must grow materially
as well as spiritually. Society has been aiming to lay a new foundation
was summarised by the French Revolution in three words, Freternity,
Liberty and Equality. The French Revolution was welcomed because
of this slogan. It failed to produce equality. We welcome the Russian
Revolution because it aims to produce equality. But it cannot be too much
emphasized that in producing equality society cannot afford to sacrifice
fraternity or liberty. Equality will be of no value without fraternity or
liberty. It seems that the three can coexist only if one follows the way
of the Buddha. Communism can give one but not all.