SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches, Vol. 10
TYPE: Public Address / Political-Economic Analysis
I appreciate very much the kind invitation of your Secretary
to come and address you this evening. I was hesitating to
accept this invitation and for two reasons. In the first place I
can say very little which can bind the Government. Secondly
I can say very little about Trade Unionism in which you are
primarily interested. I accepted the invitation because your
Secretary would not take a ‘ No ’ from me. I also felt that
this was probably the best opportunity I can have to speak
out my thoughts on Labour organization in India which have
been uppermost in my mind and which I thought may even
interest those who are primarily interested in Trade Unionism.
The Government of human society has undergone some very
significant changes. There was a time when the government
of human society had taken the form of autocracy by Despotic
Sovereigns. This was replaced after a long and bloody
struggle by a system of government known as Parliamentary
Democracy. It was felt that this was the last word in the
frame work of government. It was believed to bring about
the millennium in which every human being will have the
right to liberty, property and pursuit of happiness. And there
were good grounds for such high hopes. In Parliamentary
Democracy there is the Legislature to express the voice of
the people; there is the Executive which is subordinate to
the Legislature and bound to obey the Legislature. Over
and above the Legislature and the Executive there is
the Judiciary to control both and keep them both within prescribed bounds. Parliamentary Democracy has all the marks
of a popular Government, a government of the people, by the
people and for the people. It is therefore a matter of some
surprise that there has been a revolt against Parliamentary
Democracy although not even a century has elapsed since its
universal acceptance and inauguration. There is revolt against
it in Italy, In Germany, in Russia, and in Spain, and there are
very few countries in which there has not been discontent against
Parliamentary Democracy. Why should there be this discontent
and dissatisfaction against Parliamentary Democracy ? It is a
question worth considering. There is no country in which the
urgency of considering this question is greater than it is in India.
India is negotiating to have Parliamentary Democracy. There is
a great need of some one with sufficient courage to tell Indians
“Beware of Parliamentary Democracy, it is not the best product,
as it appeared to be.”
Why has Parliamentary Democracy failed ? In the country
of the dictators it has failed because it is a machine whose
movements are very slow. It delays swift action. In a Parliamentary
Democracy the Executive may be held up by the Legislature which
may refuse to pass the laws which the Executive wants, and if
it is not held up by the Legislature it may be held up by the
Judiciary which may declare the laws as illegal. Parliamentary
Democracy gives no free hand to Dictatorship, and that is why
it is a discredited institution in countries like Italy, Spain and
Germany which are ruled by Dictators. If Dictators alone were
against Parliamentary Democracy it would not have mattered
at all. Their testimony against Parliamentary Democracy would
be no testimony at all. Indeed Parliamentary Democracy would
be welcomed for the reason that it can be an effective check
upon Dictatorship. But unfortunately there is a great deal of
discontent against Parliamentary Democracy even in countries
where people are opposed to Dictatorship. That is the most
regrettable fact about Parliamentary Democracy. This is all
more regrettable because Parliamentary Democracy has not
been at a standstill. It has progressed in three directions. It
has progressed by expanding the notion of Equality of Political
rights. There are very few countries having Parliamentary
Democracy which have not adult suffrage. It has recognized
the principle of Equality of Social and Economic opportunity.
And thirdly it has recognised that the state cannot be held at
bay by corporations which are anti-social in their purpose. With
all this, there is immense discontent against Parliamentary
Democracy even in countries pledged to Democracy. The reasons
for discontent in such countries must obviously be different
from those assigned by the dictator countries. There is no time
to go into details. But it can be said in general terms that
the discontent against Parliamentary Democracy is due to the
realization that it has failed to assure to the masses the right
to liberty, property or the pursuit of happiness. If this is true, it
is important to know the causes which have brought about this
failure. The causes for this failure may be found either in wrong
ideology or wrong organization, or in both. I think the causes
are to be found in both. As an illustration of wrong ideology
which has vitiated Parliamentary Democracy I can only deal with
only two. I have no doubt that what has ruined Parliamentary
Democracy is the idea of freedom of contract. The idea became
sanctified and was upheld in the name of liberty. Parliamentary
Democracy took no notice of economic inequalities and did not
care to examine the result of freedom of contract on the parties
to the contract, should they happen to be unequal. It did not
mind if the freedom of contract gave the strong the opportunity
to defraud the weak. The result is that Parliamentary Democracy
in standing out as protagonist of Liberty has continuously
added to the economic wrongs of the poor, the downtrodden
and the dis-inherited class. The second wrong ideology which
has vitiated Parliamentary Democracy is the failure to realize
that political democracy cannot succeed where there is no social
and economic democracy. Some may question this proposition.
To those who are disposed to question it, I will ask a counter
question. Why Parliamentary Democracy collapsed so easily in
Italy, Germany and Russia ? Why did it not collapse so easily
in England and the U. S. A. ? To my mind there is only one
answer—namely, there was a greater degree of economic and
social democracy in the latter countries than it existed in the
former. Social and economic democracy are the tissues and the
fiber of a Political Democracy. The tougher the tissue and the
fiber, the greater the strength of the body. Democracy is another
name for equality. Parliamentary Democracy developed a passion
for liberty. It never made even a nodding acquaintance with equality. It failed to realize the significance of equality, and did
not even endeavour to strike a balance between Liberty and
Equality, with the result that liberty swallowed equality and
has left a progeny of inequities.
I have referred to the wrong ideologies which in my judgment
have been responsible for the failure of Parliamentary Democracy.
But I am equally certain that more than bad ideology it has
bad organization which has been responsible for the failure of
Democracy. All political societies get divided into two classes—
the Rulers and the Ruled. This is an evil. If the evil stopped
here it would not matter much. But the unfortunate part of it
is that the division becomes stereotyped and stratified so much
so that the Rulers are always drawn from the Ruling Class and
the class of the Ruled never becomes the Ruling class. People do
not govern themselves, they establish a government and leave
it to govern them, forgetting that is not their government. That
being the situation. Parliamentary Democarcy has never been
a government of the people or by the people, and that is why
it has never been a government for the people. Parliamentary
Democracy, notwithstanding the paraphernalia of a popular
government, is in reality a government of a hereditary subject
class by a hereditary ruling class. It is this vicious organization
of political life which has made Parliamentary Democracy such a
dismal failure. It is because of this that Parliamentary Democracy
has not fulfilled the hope it held out the common man of ensuring
to him liberty, property and pursuit of happiness.
The question is who is responsible for this ? There is no doubt
that if Parliamentary Democracy has failed to benefit the poor,
the labouring and the down trodden classes, it is these classes
who are primarily responsible for it. In the first place, they have
shown a most appalling indifference to the effect of the economic
factor in the making of men’s life. Someone very recently wrote
a book called the ‘End of the Economic Man’. We cannot really
talk of the End of the Economic Man for the simple reason
that the Economic Man was never born. The common retort to
Marx that man does not live by bread alone is unfortunately a
fact. I agree with Carlyle that the aim of civilization can not
be merely to fatten men as we do pigs. But we are far off from
that stage. The labouring class far from being fat like pigs are
starving, and one wishes that they thought of bread first and
everything else afterwards. 
Marx propounded the doctrine of the Economic interpretation
of History. A great controversy has raged over its validity. To my
mind Marx propounded it not so much as doctrine as a direction
to Labour that if Labour cares to make its economic interests
paramount, as the owning classes do, history will be a reflection
of the economic facts of life more than it has been. If the doctrine
of Economic interpretation of History is not wholly true it is
because the labouring class as a whole has failed to give economic
facts the imperative force they have in determining the terms of
associated life. The Labouring classes have failed to acquaint itself
with literature dealing with the government of mankind. Everyone
from the Labouring Classes should be acquainted with Rousseau’s
Social contract, Marx’s Communist Manifesto, Pope Leo XIII’s
Encyclical on the conditions of Labour and John Stuart Mill on
Liberty, to mention only four of the basic programmatic documents
on social and governmental organization of modern times. But the
labouring classes will not give them the attention they deserve.
Instead labour has taken delight reading false and fabulous stories
of ancient kings and queens and has become addicted to it.
There is another and a bigger crime which they have committed
against themselves. They have developed no ambition to capture
government, and are not even convinced of the necessity of
controlling government as a necessary means of safeguarding their
interests. Indeed, they are not even interested in government. Of
all the tragedies which have beset mankind, this is the biggest
and the most lamentable one. Whatever organization there is, it
has taken the form of Trade Unionism. I am not against Trade
Unions. They serve a very useful purpose. But it would be a great
mistake to suppose that Trade Unions are a panacea for all the
ills of labour. Trade Unions, even if they are powerful, are not
strong enough to compel capitalists to run capitalism better. Trade
Unions would be much more effective if they had behind them a
Labour Government to rely on. Control of Government must be
the target for Labour to aim at. Unless Trade Unionism aims at
controlling government, trade unions will do very little good to the
workers and will be a source of perpetual squables among Trade
Union Leaders.
The third besetting sin of the labouring classes is the easy way which
they are lead away by an appeal to Nationalism. The working classes who are beggared in every way and who have very little to spare,
often sacrifice their all to the so-called cause of Nationalism.
They have never cared to enquire whether the nationalism for
which they are to make their offerings will, when established,
give them social and economic equality. More often than not, the
free independent national state which emerges from a successful
nationalism and which reared on their sacrifices, turns to be the
enemy of the working class under the hegemony of their masters.
This is the worst kind of exploitation that Labour has allowed
itself to be subjected to.
If the working classes have to live under a system of
Parliamentary Democracy then it must devise the best possible
means to turn it to their benefit. As far as I can see, two things
are necessary if this object is to be achieved. First thing to do is
to discard mere establishment of Trade Unions as the final aim
and object of Labour in India. It must declare that its aim is to
put labour in charge of Government. For this it must organize
a Labour Party as a political party. Such a party will no doubt
cover Trade Unions in its organization. But it must be free
from the narrow and cramping vision of Trade Unionism, with
its stress on the immediate gain at the cost of ultimate benefit
and with the vested right of Trade Union officials to represent
Labour. It must equally dissociate itself from communal or
capitalistic political parties such as the Hindu Mahasabha or
the Congress. There is no necessity for Labour to submerge
itself in the Congress or the Hindu Mahasabha or be the camp
followers of either, simply because these bodies claim to be
fighting for the freedom of India. Labour by a separate political
organization of its ranks can serve both the purposes. It can
fight the battle of India’s freedom better by freeing itself from
the clutches of the Congress and the Hindu Mahasabha. It can
prevent itself from being defrauded in the name of nationalism.
What is most important is that it will act as a powerful check on
the irrationalism of Indian politics, Congress politics is claimed
to be revolutionary. That is why it has secured a large number
of followers. But it is also a fact that Congress politics has
brought nothing but frustration. The reason is Congress politics
is so irrational and it is irrational largely because Congress
has no rival. A Labour Party in India would be most welcome
corrective to this irrationalism which has dominated Indian
politics for the last two decades. The second thing for Labour in India to realize is that without knowledge there is no power.
When a Labour Party is formed in India and when such a
party puts forth its claim to be installed on the Gadi before
the electorate, the question, whether Labour is fit to govern, is
sure to be asked. It would be no answser to say that Labour
could not govern worse or display greater bankruptcy in home or
foreign affairs than the other classes. Labour will have to prove
positively that it can govern better. Let it not also be forgotten
that the pattern of Labour Government is a very difficult one
than that of the other classes. Labour government cannot be a
government of laissez faire. It will be a government which must
essentially be based on a system of control. A system of control
needs a far greater degree of Knowledge and training than a
laissez faire government does. Unfortunately, Labour in India
has not realized the importance of study. All that Labour leaders
in India have done, is to learn how best to abuse Industrialists.
Abuse and more abuse has become the be-all and end-all of his
role as a labour leader.
I am therefore very glad to find that the Indian Federation
of Labour has recognized this defect and has come forward to
open these study circles for the Labouring Classes. They are
going to be the most effective means of making Labour fit to
govern. I hope the Federation will not forget the other necessity
namely to inaugurate a Labour Party. When this is done, the
Federation will deserve the thanks of the Labouring Classes to
have raised them to the status of a governing class.