SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 2
CONTEXT: Ambedkar discusses the scope and necessity of the Whipping Bill, arguing that the punishment should apply only to communal riots and not to all riots, reflecting his careful reasoning and legal-philosophical approach.
Sir, after having heard my honourable friend the
Honourable Mr. Bell, who is in charge of this Bill, and the honourable member
the Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, I do not think that there remains any
necessity for arguing a case for the necessity of this measure ; nor does
there remain, in my opinion, any necessity for arguing the question whether
whipping is a proper punishment. That we have had very serious riots in
the city of Bombay and often in the mofussil, which have been a disgrace
to Indian society and Indian civilization, no honourable member, I am sure,
can dispute. That whipping as a method of punishment is on the Indian
statute book is itself sufficient argument against those who say that we are
making a new departure. Consequently, Sir, the only point that remains for
discussion in my humble judgment, is whether the provisions of the Bill, as
they are framed, go beyond the necessities of the occasion. That seems to
me to be the only point that survives for discussion.
Sir, having read the Bill, having applied my mind to clause 2 of the Bill,
which is the substantive clause, I find some difficulty in agreeing to the
provisions as they are worded in clause 2. That clause as it stands says
that the provisions of section 4 of the Whipping Act shall apply to every
offence of rioting which may come within sections 146 and 148 of the Indian
Penal Code. Now, Sir, I was under the impression that this measure was
contrived and devised for the special purpose of dealing with what are called
communal riots. Riots, Sir, may be of various sorts ; the purpose, the motive,
the occasion may be different. We may have a riot arising out of an industrial
strike in the city of Bombay; we may have a riot which is occasioned by
a casual fracas between poor people who assemble together for asserting
a certain right over certain properties which they may, however illegally
but in their honest belief, think belong to them. Sir, this House ought to
know that the offence of rioting really arises out of an offence of unlawful
assembly. An unlawful assembly becomes a riot when that assembly uses
force. That is the definition given in section 146 of rioting. Now, an unlawful
assembly, although it may not be an offence which we can overlook, is
certainly not such a serious offence as to invite such a terrible punishment as whipping. Consequently my view is this, that if we are to introduce this
punishment of whipping, we ought to amend clause 2 in such a manner that
it shall become applicable only to those riots which may be said to arise
out of a communal fracas and not to any other riots. The clause as it is, I
submit, is worded so broadly as to embrace almost any riot, which may be
occasioned by anything which may be of a very passing character or which
may be so normal in human affairs that we really ought not to extend this
punishment to such cases. And the Indian Penal Code, I submit, has very
wisely provided the ordinary forms of punishment for ordinary offences of
rioting. If this Bill is a necessity it can be a necessity only for the special
purpose of dealing with a communal riot and for no other purpose. If my
honourable friend the Home Member is prepared to alter the wording of
clause 2 in such a manner that this punishment can be made applicable
only to offences arising specially out of communal riots, he will have my
support. That is all that I have to say on this occasion.