SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 2
CONTEXT: Ambedkar critiques the Excise Minister’s approach to prohibition, argues that high tariffs encourage illicit liquor production, and stresses the need for proper taxation to support prohibition. Highlights principles of economic policy and social responsibility in legislative decision-making.
Sir, I realise that the feelings of this House on the
matter of prohibition run very high ; not that I do not share those feelings,
but for other reasons I do not wish to be harsh to the Honourable the
Minister for Excise. I realise that he is a new man for the office. I realise
also that it is a very wrong place for a man to be in. I congratulate him on
the courage he has shown in accepting the place which another honourable
member of this House thought it better to leave.
I rise to speak on this subject simply because I feel that what has
fallen from the Honourable the Minister for Excise during the last two or
three days has left the impression on me that he will fall into the bad old
ways, which are the established ways of this department. In course of the
interpellation that we had the other day, to my mind, he made somewhat an
extraordinary statement. He stated that he opened a shop somewhere near
the borders of the Nizam’s Dominions because the Nizam had opened a shop
in our territory. Sir, I do not think that is an argument which a Minister
who has accepted the policy of prohibition ought to advance in this House.
That argument amounts to something like this ; that because a dacoit has
committed dacoity and carried away some booty which the Honourable the
Minister for Excise could have done himself that he himself is entitled to
commit the dacoity. Sir, a wrong committed by one does not justify another
to commit a similar wrong. The best policy for my honourable friend the
Minister for Excise to adopt was to remonstrate with His Exalted Highness
the Nizam for having opened shops near our territories. Instead of doing
that he has placed the interest of revenue over and above the interests of
the people of this Presidency.
It seems to me that my honourable friend the Minister for Excise looks
only to revenue exclusive of every other consideration. In the course of the
debate on the budget he also made a statement which I think ought to be
taken seriously into consideration. In reply to certain criticisms which I
offered he said that in judging of the policy of the Excise Department we
ought to take into consideration the amount of consumption of liquor in
the presidency and not the amount of money that is raised by the Excise Department. He gave us certain figures to show that the people of Bombay
were not drinking as much as the people of the other provinces in India. I
have not had the time to look into those figures, but I think we may accept
the figures as they were given by the Honourable the Minister for Excise.
But I think, Sir, that my honourable friend will admit that while people are
drinking less of licit liquor, the manufacture of illicit liquor in this presidency
has been on the increase. So, if we take into consideration the fact that
although drinking of licit liquor is decreasing, drinking of illicit liquor is
on the increase, the result that we get is that the consumption is not less.
Of course we have not got the actual figures of illicit manufacture, but I
believe the fact is admitted, I think the Honourable the Minister for Excise
will be first to urge it, that illicit liquor is increasing. So, on the whole we
are not gainers, because the only result is that people are drinking less of
licit liquor and more of illicit liquor. The question that then arises is, why
is the manufacture of illicit liquor increasing in this presidency ? So far as
I am aware, there has been no official reply to this question. But I venture
to give a reply for it for what it is worth. I think, Sir, the increase in the
manufacture of illicit liquor in this presidency is entirely due to the high
tariff on country liquor. Now, it is an admitted principle of political economy,
not only a principle which is embodied in text-books, but I believe it is also
a principle which is acted upon and known to every housewife that when
the price of a certain commodity rises, then, there is always a tendency on
the part of the people to substitute another commodity in its place which
is equally serviceable and which costs less. We all know, for instance, that
when sugar rises in price people will substitute gul in place of sugar and
if coffee was to rise in price people will consume more of tea. Applying the
same principle to this case, I submit, Sir, that the increase of illicit drink
in this presidency is entirely due to the high tariff on country liquor. My
honourable friend the Minister for Excise will therefore pay a little more
attention to this aspect of the question. If he is really a believer in prohibition
he must regulate his tariff. If he does not regulate the tariff, I submit that
although he may succeed in controlling the consumption of licit liquor, he
will give a direct incentive to the increase in illicit liquor.
The other point that I wish to speak of is as regards the policy of
prohibition. I was glad to hear from my honourable friend the Leader of
of the House in reply to certain arguments urged by my honourable friend
Mr. Murzban, that prohibition is now the accepted policy of Government,
and that Government under no circumstances would go back on the policy
resolved upon by the Legislative Council. But, Sir, I was a little disappointed
when, as I believe, he sidetracked us a little from the real issue before us.
He told us that the issue before the House was, what method we should
adopt in bringing about prohibition, whether we should adopt the method
of rationing or whether we should adopt the method of local option. Sir, in
my view the two methods, making allowance for minor details, are more or less equally efficient. Whether you adopt the policy of rationing or
whether you adopt the policy of local option, makes no difference in the
situation whatsoever, because the effect of either is to control the supply of
liquor that will be put on the market. Whether you do it by not supplying
more to the shop-keepers or whether you do it by not opening shops at all,
the result is the same. But, Sir, the question is how far we can go on in
advancing the policy of prohibition and that question, I think, my honourable
friend the Leader of the House has not taken into account. I feel, Sir, that
the problem of prohibition, whether you will be able to carry it out to a
successful issue or not, entirely depends upon the financial solution of the
question, upon how we will manage to make good the losses we are bound
to incur as a result of our new excise policy. I think we on this side of
the House would have liked to hear a good deal from the Honourable the
Leader of the House as to the kind and method of taxation that he has in
contemplation. Sir, I think although there might be differences of opinion
in this House, we at least on this side feel that we are not opposed to the
additional taxation, provided of course the Government will use the taxes for
nation-building proposes. We are certainly opposed to additional taxation if
Government are going to use the taxes merely to maintain the Government,
merely to govern. But if they are going to make life happy, and not merely
try to make life possible, then, I think we on this side are certainly willing
to support any tax. The honourable member the Leader of the House tried
to repudiate the charge of insincerity that was made against Government.
Sir, I think no Government ought to make any promise as regards carrying
out a policy of prohibition unless it has made up its mind as to how it will
make good the loss of revenue. Unless therefore my honourable friend has
got the courage—that is far more important than mere conviction—unless
he has the courage to tax the people who have not been taxed so far, people
who have better capacity to bear the burden, I think it is no use his trying
to incur the odium of making a promise and not carrying it out. The best
thing for the Honourable the Leader of the House would have been to bring
forward a proposal for taxation and to test the sincerity of this House as
regards the policy which it has been asking him to pursue. I think the House
understands as well as anybody that this policy is going to cost money, and
it was the duty and interest of my honourable friend the Leader of the House
to have obtained from the House an assurance that it was willing to meet
the cost of the policy it was so strenuously enforcing upon him. With these
remarks I beg to resume my seat.