SOURCE: Constituent Assembly Debates of India
SPEECH TITLE: Final Speech on the Adoption of the Constitution of India
TYPE: Constitutional Speech / Legislative Address
Sir, looking back on the work of
the Constituent Assembly it will now be two years, eleven months and
seventeen days since it first met on the 9th of December 1946. During this
period the Constituent Assembly has altogether held eleven sessions. Out of
these eleven sessions the first six were spent in passing the ejectives
Resolution and the consideration of the Reports of Committees on
Fundamental Rights, on Union Constitution, on Union Powers, on Provincial
Constitution, on Minorities and on the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled
Tribes. The seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and the eleventh sessions were
devoted to the consideration of the Draft Constitution. These eleven
sessions of the Constituent Assembly have consumed 165 days. Out of these,
the Assembly spent 114 days for the consideration of the Draft Constitution.
Coming to the Drafting Committee, it was elected by the Constituent
Assembly on 29th August 1947. It held its first meeting on 30th August. Since
August 30th it sat for 141 days during which it was engaged in the
preparation of the Draft Constitution. The Draft Constitution as prepared
by the Constitutional Adviser as a text for the Draft Committee to work
upon consisted of 243 articles and 13 Schedules. The first Draft Constitution
as presented by the Drafting Committee to the Constituent Assembly
contained 315 articles and 8 Schedules. At the end of the consideration
stage, the number of articles in the Draft Constitution increased to 386. In
its final form, the Draft Constitution contains 395 articles and 8 Schedules.
The total number of amendments to the Draft Constitution tabled was
approximately 7,635. Of them, the total number of amendments actually
moved in the House was 2,473.
I mention these facts because at one stage it was being said that the
Assembly had taken too long a time to finish its work, that it was going on
leisurely and wasting the public money. It was said to be a case of Nero
fiddling while Rome was burning. Is there any justification for this complaint? Let us note the time the consumed by Constituent Assemblies in
other countries appointed for framing their Constitutions. To take a few
illustrations, the American Convention met on May 25th 1787 and completed
its work on September 17, 1787 i.e., within four months. The Constitutional
Convention of Canada met on the 10th October 1864 and the Constitution
was passed into law in March 1867 involving a period of two years and five
months. The Australian Constitutional Convention assembled in March 1891
and the Constitution became law on the 9
th July 1900, consuming a period
of nine years. The South African Convention met in October, 1908 and the
Constitution became law on the 20th September 1909 involving one year's
labour. It is true that we have taken more time than what the American or
South African Conventions did. But we have not taken more time than the
Canadian Convention and much less than the Australian Convention. In
making comparisons on the basis of time consumed, two things must be
remembered. One is that the Constitutions of America, Canada, South
Africa and Australia are much smaller than ours. Our Constitution as I said
contains 395 articles while the American has just seven articles, the first
four of which are divided into sections which total up to 21, the Canadian
has 147, Australian 128 and South African 153 sections. The second thing to
be remembered is that the makers of the Constitutions of America, Canada,
Australia and South Africa did not have to face the problem of
amendments. They were passed as moved. On the other hand, this
Constituent Assembly had to deal with as many as 2.473 amendments.
Having regard to these facts the charge of dilatoriness seems to me quite
unfounded and this Assembly may well congratulate itself for having
accomplished so formidable a task in so short a time.
Turning to the quality of the work done by the Drafting Committee,
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed felt it his duty to condemn it outright. In his opinion,
the work done by the Drafting Committee is not only not worthy of
commendation, but is positively below par. Everybody has a right to have
his opinion about the work done by the Drafting Committee and Mr.
Naziruddin is welcome to have his own. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed thinks he is a
man of greater talents than any member of the Drafting Committee. The
drafting Committee does not wish to challenge his claim, on the other
hand. The Drafting Committee would have welcomed him in their midst if
the Assembly had thought him worthy of being appointed to it. If he had no place in the making of the Constitution it is certainly not the fault of the
Drafting Committee.
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed has coined a new name for the Drafting
Committee evidently to show his contempt for it. He calls it a Drifting
committee. Mr. Naziruddin must no doubt be pleased with his hit. But he
evidently does not know that there is a difference between drift without
mastery and drift with mastery. If the Drafting Committee was drifting, it
was' never without mastery over the situation. It was not merely angling
with the off chance of catching a fish. It was searching in known waters to
find the fish it was after. To be in search of something better is not the
same as drifting. Although Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed did not mean it as a
compliment to the Drafting committee, I take it as a compliment to the
Drafting Committee. The Drafting Committee would have been guilty of
gross dereliction of duty and of a false sense of dignity if it had not shown
the honesty and the courage to withdraw the amendments which it
thought faulty and substitute what it thought was better. If it is a mistake, I
am glad that the Drafting Committee did not fight shy of admitting such
mistakes and coming forward to correct them.
I am glad to find that with the exception of a solitary member, there
is a general consensus of appreciation from the members of the Constituent
Assembly of the work done by the Drafting Committee. I am sure the
Drafting Committee feels happy to find this spontaneous recognition of its
labours expressed in such generous terms. As to the compliments that have
been showered upon me both by the members of the Assembly as well as
by my colleagues of the Drafting Committee I feel so overwhelmed that I
cannot find adequate words to express fully my gratitude to them. I came
into the Constituent Assembly with no greater aspiration than to safeguard
the interests of he Scheduled Castes. I had not the remotest idea that I
would be called upon to undertake more responsible functions. I was
therefore greatly surprised when the Assembly elected me to the Drafting
Committee. I was more than surprised when the Drafting Committee
elected me to be its Chairman. There were in the Drafting Committee men
bigger, better and more competent than myself such as my friend Sir Alladi
KrishnasWami Ayyar. I am grateful to the Constituent Assembly and the
Drafting Committee for reposing in me so much trust and confidence and to have chosen me as their instrument and given me this opportunity of serving the country.
The credit that is given to me does not really belong to me. It belongs
partly to Sir B.N. Rau, the Constitutional Adviser to the Constituent
Assembly who prepared a rough draft of the Constitution for the
consideration of the Drafting Committee. A part of the credit must go to
the members of the Drafting Committee who, as I have said, have sat for 141
days and without whose ingenuity of devise new formulae and capacity to
tolerate and to accommodate different points of view, the task of framing
the Constitution could not have come to so successful a conclusion. Much
greater, share of the credit must go to Mr. S.N. Mukherjee, the Chief
Draftsman of the constitution. His ability to put the most intricate
proposals in the simplest and clearest legal form can rarely be equalled, nor
his capacity for hard work. "He has been as acquisition to the Assembly.
Without his help, this Assembly would have taken many more years to
finalise the Constitution. I must not omit to mention the members of the
staff working under Mr. Mukherjee. For, I know how hard they have worked
and how long they have toiled sometimes even beyond midnight. I want to
thank them all for their effort and their co- operation. (Cheers.)
The task of the Drafting Committee would have been a very difficult
one if this Constituent Assembly has been merely a motely crowd, a
tessellated pavement without cement, a black stone here and a white stone
there is which each member or each group was a law unto itself. There
would have been nothing but chaos. This possibility of chaos was reduced
to nil by the existence of the Congress Party inside the Assembly which
brought into its proceedings a sense of order and discipline. It is because of
the discipline of the Congress Party that the Drafting Committee was able
to pilot the Constitution in the Assembly with the sure knowledge as to
the fate of each article and each amendment. The Congress Party is,
therefore, entitled to all the credit for the smooth sailing of the Draft
Constitution in the Assembly.
The proceedings of this Constituent Assembly would have been very
dull if all members had yielded to the rule of party discipline. Party
discipline, in all its rigidity, would have converted this Assembly into a
gathering of yes' men. Fortunately, there were rebels. They were Mr. Kamath, Dr. PS. Deshmukh, Mr. Sidhva, Prof. Saxena & Pandit Thakur, Das
Bhargava alongwith they I must mention Prof. K.T Shah and Pandit Hirday
Nath Kunzru. The points they raised were mostly ideological. That I was
not prepared to accept their suggestions does not diminish the value of
their suggestions nor lessen the service they have rendered to the
Assembly in enlivening its proceedings. I am grateful to them. But for
them, I would not have had the opportunity which I got for expounding
the principles underlying the Constitution which was more important than
the mere mechanical work of passing the Constitution.
Finally, I must thank you Mr. President for the way in which you
have conducted the proceedings of this Assembly. The courtesy and the
consideration which you have shown to the Members of the Assembly can
never be forgotten by those who have taken part in the proceedings of
this Assembly. There were occasions when the amendments of the
Drafting Committee were sought to be barred on grounds purely technical
in their nature. Those were very anxious moments for me. I am, therefore,
especially grateful to you for not permitting legalism to defeat the work
of Constitution-making.