SOURCE: Constituent Assembly Debates of India
SPEECH TITLE: Final Speech on the Adoption of the Constitution of India
TYPE: Constitutional Speech / Legislative Address
It is not that India did not know what Democracy is. There was a time
when India was studded with republics, and even where there were
monarchies, they were either elected or limited. They were never absolute.
It is not that India did not know Parliaments or Parliamentary Procedure. A
study of the Buddhist Bhikshu Sanghas discloses that not only there were Parliaments-for the Sanghas were nothing but Parliaments - but the
Sanghas knew and observed all the rules of Parliamentary Procedure
known to modern times. They had rules regarding seating arrangements,
rules regarding Motions, Resolutions, Quorum, Whip, Counting of Votes,
Voting by Ballot, Censure Motion, Regularization, Res Judicata, etc.
Although these rules of Parliamentary Procedure were applied by the
Buddha to the meetings of the Sang has, he must have borrowed them
from the rules of the Political Assemblies functioning in the country in his
time.
This democratic system India lost. Will she lose it a second time? I do
not know. But-it is quite possible in a country like India - where democracy
from its long disuse must be regarded as something quite new - there is
danger of democracy giving place to dictatorship. It is quite possible for this
new born democracy to retain its form but give place to dictatorship in
fact. If there is a landslide, the danger of the second possibility becoming·
actuality is much greater.
If we wish to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also in
fact, what must we do? The first thing in my judgement we must do is to
hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and economic
objectives. It means we must abandon the bloody methods of revolution.
It means that we must abandon the method of civil disobedience, noncooperation and satyagraha. When there was no way left for
constitutional methods for achieving economic and social objectives, there
was a great deal of justification for unconstitutional methods. But where
constitutional methods are open, there can be no justification for these
unconstitutional methods. These methods are nothing but the Grammar of
Anarchy and the sooner they are abandoned, the better for us.
The second thing we must do is to observe the caution which John
Stuart Mill has given to all who are interested in the maintenance of
democracy, namely, not “to lay their liberties at the feet of even a great
man, or to trust him with power which enable him to subvert their
institutions.”There is nothing wrong in being grateful to great men who
have rendered life-long services to the country. But there are limits to
gratefulness, As has been well said by the Irish Patriot Daniel O’Connell, no
man can be grateful at the cost of his honour, no woman can be grateful at the cost of her chastity and no nation can be grateful at the cost of its
liberty. This caution is far more necessary in the case of India than in the
case of any other country. For in India, Bhakti or what may be called the
path of devotion or hero-worship, plays a part in its politics unequalled in
magnitude by the part it plays in the politics of any other country in the
world. Bhakti in religion may be a road to the salvation of the soul. But in
politics, Bhakti or hero- worship is a sure road to degradation and to
eventual dictatorship.
The third thing we must do is not to be content with mere political
democracy. We must make our political democracy a social democracy as
well. Political democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of it social
democracy. What does social democracy mean? It means a way of life
which recognizes liberty, equality and fraternity as the principles of life.
These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity as the principles of life.
These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are not to be treated as
separate items in a trinity. They form a union of trinity in the sense that to
divorce one from the other is to defeat the very purpose of democracy.
Liberty cannot be divorced from equality, equality cannot be divorced
from liberty. Nor can liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity.
Without equality, liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over
the many. [Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative.]
Without fraternity, liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over
the many. [Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative.]
Without fraternity, liberty and equality could not become a natural course
of things. It would require a constable to enforce them. We must begin by
acknowledging the fact that there is complete absence of two things in
Indian Society. One of these is equality. On the social plane, we have in
India a society based on the principle of graded inequality which we have a
society in which there are some who have immense wealth as against many
who live in abject poverty. On the 26th of January 1950, we are going to
enter into a life of contradictions. In politics we will have equality and in
social and economic life we will have inequality. In politics we will be
recognizing the principle of one man one vote and one vote one value. In
our social and economic life, we shall, by reason of our social and economic
structure, continue to deny the principle of one man one value. How long
shall we continue to live this life of contradictions? How long shall we continue to deny equality in our social and economic life? If we continue to
deny it for long, we will do so only by putting our political democracy in
peril. We must remove this contradiction at the earliest possible moment or
else those who suffer from inequality will blow up the structure of political
democracy which is Assembly has to laboriously built up.
The second thing we are wanting in is recognition of the principle of
fraternity. What does fraternity mean? Fraternity means a sense of common
brotherhood of all Indians-if Indians being one people. It is the principle
which gives unity and solidarity to social life. It is a difficult thing to achieve.
How difficult it is, can be realized 'from the story related by James Bryce in
his volume on American Commonwealth about the United States of
America.
The story is- I propose to recount it in the words of Bryce himselfthat-
“Some years ago the American Protestant Episcopal Church was
occupied at its triennial Convention in revising its liturgy. It was thought
desirable to introduce among the short sentence prayers a prayer for the
whole people, and an eminent New England divine proposed the words ‘O’
Lord, bless our nation'. Accepted one afternoon, on the spur of the
moment, the sentence was brought up next day for reconsideration, when
so many objections were raised by the laity to the word nation' as
importing too definite a recognition of national unity, that it was dropped,
and instead there were adopted the words' 0 Lord, bless these United
States.”
There was so little solidarity in the U.S.A. at the time when this
incident occurred that the people of America did not think that they were a
nation. If the people of the United States could not feel that they were a
nation, how difficult it is for Indians to think that they are a nation. I
remember the days when politically- minded Indians, resented the
expression "the people of India." They preferred the expression the Indian
nation." I am of opinion that in believing that we are a nation, we are
cherishing a great delusion. How can people divided into several thousands
of castes be a nation? The sooner we realize that we are not as yet a nation
in the social and psychological sense of the world, the better for us. For then
only we shall realize the necessity of becoming a nation and seriously think of ways and means of realising the goal. The realization of this goal is going
to be very difficult - far more difficult than it has been in the United States.
The United States has no caste problem. In India there are castes. The castes
are anti-national. In the first place because they bring about separation in
social life. They are anti-national also because they generate jealousy and
antipathy between caste and caste. But we must overcome all these
difficulties if we wish to become a nation in reality. For fraternity can be a
fact only when there is a nation. Without fraternity equality and liberty will
be no deeper than coats of paint.
These are my reflections about the tasks that lie ahead of us. They
may not be very pleasant to some. But there can be no gainsaying that
political power in this country has too long been the monopoly of a few and
the many are only beasts of burden, but also beasts of prey. This monopoly
has not merely deprived them of their chance of betterment; it has sapped
them of what may be called the significance of life. These down-trodden
classes are tired of being governed. They are impatient to govern
themselves. This urge for self-realization in the down-trodden classes must
no be allowed to devolve into a class struggle or class war. It would lead to a
division of the House. That would indeed be a day of disaster. For, as has
been well said by Abraham Lincoln, a House divided against itself cannot
stand very long. Therefore the sooner room is made for the realization of
their aspiration, the better for the few, the better for the country, the
better for the maintenance for its independence and the better for the
continuance of its democratic structure. This can only be done by the
establishment of equality and fraternity in all spheres of life. That is why I
have laid so much Stresses on them.
I do not wish to weary the House any further. Independence is no
doubt a matter of joy. But let us not forget that this independence has
thrown on us great responsibilities. By independence, we have lost the
excuse of blaming the British for anything going wrong. If hereafter’ things
go wrong, we will have nobody to blame. Except ourselves. There is great
danger of things going wrong. Times are fast changing. People including
our own are being moved by new ideologies. They are getting tired of
Government by the people. They are prepared to have Governments for the
people and are indifferent whether it is Government of the people and by the people. If we wish to preserve the Constitution in which we have sought
to enshrine the principle of Government of the people, for the people and
by the people, let us resolve not to be tardy in the recognition of the evils
that lie across our path and which induce people to prefer Government for
the people to Government by the people, nor to be weak in our initiative to
remove them. That is the only way to serve the country. I know of no
better, 
