SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 2
CONTEXT: Ambedkar supports the first reading of the bill but critiques vague terms like “neglect” or “conducing,” emphasizing potential oppression and unintended consequences. He suggests referring the bill to a select committee for refinement.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, one notices that
there is not much enthusiasm for this Bill because one does not see the
same competition that is observable when other Bills are before the House,
and when I rise, although I am desirous of making reference to only one
section, I also confess that I do not feel any very great enthusiasm for this
Bill, and that, I submit, is very natural, because the Bill does not touch any
problem which can be said to be either grave or urgent. It touches a very
small problem. The Bill, I am told, follows very closely an English statute.
I do not know whether the English people who are made subject to the
statute which is taken as a model for this Bill have derived any benefit
which may be called to be considerable, but I trust that the Honourable the
Home Minister has examined the position carefully and has evidently come
to the conclusion that the benefit arising from this Act in the country in
which it is now prevailing, is certainly so considerable that we ought also
to follow it by similar legislation in our province.
Sir, I have nothing to say with regard to the detailed provisions contained
in the Bill, and I say at the outset that reading the Bill as it is, I think
there are principles embodied in this Bill to which I can lend my support.
There is only one clause about which I feel some trouble and which I would
like to place before the Honourable the Home Minister for his consideration,
and that clause is clause 6. Clause 6 seems to me to embody a principle
which may become in its operation somewhat oppressive, to use a very mild
expression. The latter part of clause 6 says :
“and if the offender is under the age of sixteen years, and it appears to the
Court that the parent or guardian of the offender has conduced by his neglect
or in any other way to the commission of the offence, the Court may order
payment of such damages or compensation and costs by such parent or guardian.”
It seems to me that this may rightly involve a great deal of oppression
as against the parent or guardian. My learned friend the Honourable the
Home Minister will agree that the words “neglect” and “negligence” are the vaguest of the vague words, and it is very difficult to give any positive
definition of what is negligence and what is not negligence. If I may refer
to what happened during the course of the Civil Disobedience Movement, I
think it will give an analogy by which it might be possible for my honourable
friend to realise the difficulty which I feel. I believe it is true— I will stand
corrected if I am told that I am wrong—that during the Civil Disobedience
Movement many civil servants who were in the service of the State and
whose children had taken to the Civil Disobedience Movement, were brought
under disciplinary action on the ground that they had not justified their
duty to the State by seeing that the children did not follow the movement
which was subversive of the Government of the day. I think I am right in
saying that members who are now sitting opposite did take great objection
to that principle, because, if I understand them correctly, their contention
was that no parents could be responsible for the conduct of their children,
especially if the conduct involved the holding of a certain opinion which may
differ very legitimately from the opinion of their parents. My submission is
that a child may develop criminal proclivities notwithstanding the fact that
the parent has been as careful and as dutiful as ordinarily parents are; and
unless the word “neglect” or “connivance” or “conducing” is properly defined,
it seems to me that this Bill may lead to consequences which would be
far greater than those which probably the Honourable the Home Member
himself intends.
My honourable friend Mr. Bramble, who undoubtedly, as one sees from
the speech that he made, has devoted special attention to the study of this
problem, has pointed out that the English law contains certain anomalies,
and that if the English law is to be taken as our model, we ought to take this
occasion in order to see that the anomalies which are found in the English
law are not introduced in the legislation that we are passing. I have every
reason to believe that the statement that he has made is based upon the
deepest study, and if that is so and the prestige of the Government does
not come in the way, I would join in the request made by the honourable
member Mr. Bramble that this Bill could very well be referred to a select
committee, where all the points that may be raised either in favour of certain
principles or against may be threshed out, so that the Bill may become as
perfect as we in this House can make it. With these remarks, I support the
first reading of the Bill.