SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches
AUTHOR: Dr. B. R. Ambedkar
TYPE: Speech / Social Reform Address
25 December 1927 is a watershed in the histoy of the Dalit movement.
On this day, Dr Ambedkm began an agitation by the Dalits to draw
water ftvrm the Chavadar hke at Mahad. The water of this lake was
hitherto reserved for caste Hindus. The Manusmriti was burnt here as a
mark of Dalit protest against untouchability. The following is the historic
speech made by Dr Ambegkar on this occasion.
Gentlemen, you have gathered here today in response to the invitation
of the Satyagraha Committee. As the Chairman of that Committee, I
gratefully welcome ybu all.
Many of you will remember that on the 19th of last March all of us
came to the Chavadar Lake here. The caste Hindus of Mahad had laid
no prohibition on us; but they showed they had objections to our going
there by the attack they made. The fight brought results that one
might have expected. The aggressive caste Hindus were sentenced to
four months’ rigorous imprisonment, and are now in jail. If we had
not been hindered on 19th March, it would have been proved that the
caste Hindus acknowledge our right to draw water from the lake, and
we should have had no need to begin our present undertaking.
Unfortunately we were thus hindered, and we have been obliged
to call this meeting today. This lake at Mahad is public property. The
caste Hindus of Mahad are so reasonable that they not only draw water
from the lake themselves but freely permit people of any religion to
draw water from it, and accordingly people of other religions such as
the Islamic do make use of this permission. Nor do the caste Hindus
prevent members of species considered lower than the human, such
as birds and beasts, from drinking at the lake. Moreover, they freely
permit beasts kept by untouchables to drink at the lake.
Caste Hindus are the very founts of compassion. They practise no
hinsa and harass no one. They are not of the class of miserly and selfish
folk who would grudge even a crow some grains of the food they are
eating. The proliferation of sanyasis and mendicants is a living
testimony to their charitable temperament. They regard altruism as religious merit and injury to another as a sin.
Even further, they have imbibed the principle that injury done by
another must not be repaid but patiently endured, and so, they not
only treat the harmless cow wit4 kindness, but spare harmful creatures
such as snakes. That one Amn or Spiritual Self dwells in all creatures
has become a settled principle of their conduct. Such are the caste
Hindus who forbid some human beings of their own religion to draw
water from the Same Chavadar Lake! One cannot help asking the
question, why do they forbid us alone?
It is essential that all should understand thoroughly the answer to
this question. Unless you do, I feel, you will not grasp completely the
importance of today's meeting. The Hindus are divided, according to
sacred tradition, into four castes; but according to custom, into five:
Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, Shudras and Atishudras. The caste
system is the first of the governing rules of the Hindu religion. The
second is that the castes are of unequal rank. They aie ordered in a
descending series of each meaner than the one before.
Not only are their ranks permanently fwed by the rule, but each is
assigned boundaries it must not transgress, so that each one may at
once be recognized as belonging to its particular rank. There is a
general belief that the prohibitions in the Hindu religion against
intermarriage, interdining, interdrinking and social intercourse are
bounds set to degrees of association with one another. But this is an
incompIete idea. These prohibitions are indeed limits to degrees of
association; but they have been set to show people of unequal rank
what the rank of each is. That is, these bounds are symbols of
inequality.
Just as the crown on a man's head shows he is a king, and the bow
in his hand shows him to be a Kshatriya, the class to which none of
the prohibitions applies is considered the highest of all and the one to
which they all apply is reckoned the lowest in rank. The strenuous
efforts made to maintain the prohibitions are for the reason that, if
they are relaxed, the inequality settled by religion will break down
and equality will take its place.
The caste Hindus of Mahad prevent the untouchables from
drinking the water of the Chavadw Lake not because they suppose
that the touch of the untouchables will pollute the water or that it will
evaporate and vanish. Their reason for preventing the untouchables
from drinking it is that hey do not wish to acknowledge by such a
permission that castes declared inferior by sacred tradition are in fact their equals.
Gentlemen! you wil1 understand from this the signiricance of the
struggle we have begun. Do not let yourselves suppose that the
Satyagraha Committee has invited you to Mabad merely to drink the
water of the Chavadar Lake of Mahad.
It is not as if drinking the water of the Chavadar Lake wiU make
us immortal, We have survived well enough all these days without
drinking it. We are not going to the Chavadar Lake merely to drink
its water. We are going to the Lake to assert that we too are human
beings like others. It must be clear that this meeting has been called
to set up the norm of equality.
I am certain that no one who thinks of this meeting in this light will
doubt that it is unprecedented. I feel that no parallel to it can be fouqd
in the history of India. If we seek for another meeting in the past to
equal this, we shall have to go to the history of France on the continent
of Europe. A hundred and thirty-eight years ago, on 24 January 1789,
King Louis XVI had convened, by royal command, an assembly of
deputies to represent the people of the kingdom. "his French
National Assembly has been much vilified by historians. The
Assembly sent the King and the Queen of France to the guillotinh;
persecuted and massacred the aristocrats; and drove their survivors
into exile. It confiscated the estates of the rich and plunged Europe
into war for fifteen yeais. Such are the accusations levelled against the
Assembly by the historians. In my view, the criticism is misplaced;
further, the historians of this school have not understood the gist of
the achievement of the French National Assembly. That achievement
served rhe welfare not only of France but of the entire European
continent. If European nations enjoy peace and prosperity today, it is
for one reason: the revolurionary French National Assembly convened
in 1789 set new principles for the organization of society before the
disorganized and decadent French nation of its time, and the same
principles have been accepted and followed by Europe.
To appreciate the importance of the French National Assembly
and the greatness of its principles, we must keep in mind the suite of
French society at the time. You are all aware that our Hindu society
is based on the system of castes. A rather sMar sysrem of classes
existed in the France of 1789: the difference was that it was a society
of thee castes. Like the Hindu society, the French had a class of
Brahmins and another of Kshatriyas. But instead of three different
castes of Vaishya, Shudra and Atishudra, there was one class that comprehended these. This is a minor difference. The important thing
is that the caste or class system was similar. The similarity to be noted
is not only in the differentiation between classes: the inequality of our
caste system was also to be found in the French social system. The
nature of the inequality in.the French society was different: it was
economic in nature. It was, however, equally intense. The thing to
bear in mind is there is a great similarity between the French National
Assembly that met on 5 May 1789 at Versailles and our meeting today.
The similarity is not only in the circumstances in which the two
meetings took place but also in their ideals.
That Assembly of the French people was convened to reorganize
French society. Our meeting today too has been convened to
reorganize Hindu society. Hence, before discussing on what
principles our society should be reorganized, we should all pay heed
to the principles on *rhich the French Assembly relied and the policy
it adopted. The scope of the French Assembly was far wider than that
of our present meeting. It had to carry out the threefold organization
of the French political, social and religious systems. We must confine
ourselves to how wial and religious reorganization can be brought
about. Since we are not, for the present, concerned with political
reorganization, let us see what the French Assembly did in the matter
of the religious and social reorganization of their nation. The policy
adopted by the French National Assembly in this area can be seen
plainly by anyone from three impohant proclamations issued by that
Assembly. The first was issued on 17 June 1789. This was a
proclamation about the class systems in France. As said before,
French society was divided into three classes. The proclamation
abolished the three classes and blended them into one. Further, it
abolished the seats reserved separately for the three classes (or estates)
in the political assembly. The second proclamation was about the
priests. By ancient custom, to appoint or remove.these priests was
outside the power of the nation, that being the monopoly of a foreign
religious potentate, the Pope. Anyone appointed by the Pope was a
priest, whether or not he was fit to b& one in the eyes of those to whom
he was to preach. The proclamation abolished the autonomy of the
religious orders and assigned to the French nation the authority to
decide who might follow this vocation, who was fit for it and who was
not, whether he was to be paid for preaching or not, and so on. The
third proclamation was not about the political, economic or religious
systems. It was of a general nature and laid down the principles on which all social arrangements ought to rest. From that point of view,
the third proclamation is the most important of the three; it might be
called the king of these proclamations. It is renowned the world over
as the declaration of human birthrights. It is not only unprecedented
in the history of France; more than that, it is unique in the history of
civilized nations. For every European nation has followed the French
Assembly in giving it a place in its own constitution. So one may say
that it brought about a revolution not only in France but the whole
world. This proclamation has seventeen clauses, of which the
following are important:
1. All human beings are equal by birth; and they shall remain equal
till death. They may be distinguished in status only in the public
interest. Otherwise, their equal status must be maintained.
2. The ultimate object of politics is to maintain these human
birthrights.
3. The entire nation is the mother-source of sovereignty. The rights
of any individual, group or special class, unless they are given by the
nation, cannot be acknowledged as valid on any other ground, be it
political or religious.
4. Any person is free to act according to his birthright. Any limit
placed upon this freedom must be only to the extent necessary to
permit other persons to enjoy their birthrights. Such limits must be
laid down by law: they cannot be set on the grounds of the religion or
on any other basis than the law of the land.
5. The law will forbid only such actions BS ere k$iirious to swjeiy.
All must be free to do what has not been forbidden by law. Nor can
anyone be compelled to do what the law has not laid down as a duty.
6. The law is not in the nature of bounds set by any particular class.
The right to decide what the law shall be rests with the people or their
representatives. Whether such a law is protective or punitive, it must
be the same for all. Since justice requires that all social arrangements
be based on the equality of all, all individuals are equally eligible for
any kind of honour, power and profession. Any distinction in such
matters must be owing to differences of individual merit; it must not
be based on birth.
I feel our meeting today should keep the image of this French
National Assembly before the mind. The road it marked out for the
development of the French nation, the road that all progressed nations
have followed, ought to be the road adopted for the development of
Hindu society by this meeting. We need to pull away the nails which hold‘ the framework of caste-bound Hindu society together, such as
those of the prohibition of intermarriage down to the prohibition of
social intercourse so that Hindu society becomes all of one caste.
Otherwise untouchability cannot be removed nor can equality be
established.SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches
Some of you may feel that since we are untouchables, it is enough
if we are set free from the prohibitions of interdrinking and social
intercourse. That we need not concern ourselves with the caste
system; how does it matter if it remains? In my opinion this is a total
error. If we leave the caste system alone and adopt only the removal
of untouchability as our policy, people will say that we have chosen a
low aim. To raise men, aspiration is needed as much as outward
efforts. Indeed it is to be doubted whether efforts are possible without
aspiration. flence, if a great effort is to be made, a great aspiration
must be nursed. In adopting an aspiration one need not be abashed
or deterred by doubts about one’s power to satisfy it. One should be
ashamed only of mean aspirations; not of failure that may result
because one’s aspiration is high. If untouchability alone is removed,
we may change from Atishudras to Shurdas; but can we say that this
radically removes untouchability? If such puny reforms as the removal
of restrictions on social intercourse etc., were enough for the
eradication of untouchability, I would not have suggested that the
caste system itself must go. Gentlemen! you all know that if a snake
is to be killed it is not enough to strike at its tail - its head must be
crushed. If any harm is to be removed, one must seek out its root and
strike at it. An attack must be based on the knowledge of the enemy’s
vital weakness. Duryodhana was killed because Bheema struck at his
thigh with his mace. If the mace had hit Durydhana’s head he would
not have died; for his thigh was his vulnerable spot. One finds many
instances of a physician’s efforts to remove a malady proving fruitless
because he has not perceived fully what will get rid of the disease;
similar instances of failure to root out a social disease muse it is not
fully diagnosed are rarely recorded in history; and so one does not
often become aware of them. But let me acquaint you with one such
instance that I have come across in my reading. In the ancient
European nation of Rome, the patricians were considered upper class,
and the plebians, lower class. All power was in the hands of,the
patricians, and they used it to ill-treat the plebians. To free themselves
from this harassment, the plebians, on the strength of their unity,
insisted that laws should be written down for the facilitation of justice 
and for the information of all. Their patrician opponents agreed to
this; and a charter of twelve laws was written down. But this did not
rid the oppressed plebians of their woes. For the officers who enforced
the laws were all of the patrician class; moreover the chief officer,
called the tribune, was also a patrician. Hence, though the laws were
uniform, there was partiality in their enforcement. The plebians then
demanded that instead of the administration being in the hands of one
tribune there should be WO trjbunes, of whom one should k elecred
by the plebians and the other by the patricians. The patricians yielded
to this too, and the plebians rejoiced, supposing they would now be
free of their miseries. But their rejoicing was short-lived. The Roman
people had a tradition that nothing was to be done without the
favourable verdict of the oracle at Delphi. Accordingly, even the
election of a duly elected tribune - if the oracle did not approve of
him - had to be treated as annulled, and another had to be elected,
of whom the oracle approved. The priest who put the question to the
oracle was required, by sacred religious custom, to be one born of
parents married in the mode the Romans called confiratiq and this
mode of marriage prevailed only among the patricians; so that the
priest of Delphi was always a patrician.
The wily priest always saw to it that if the plebians elected a man really devoted to their cause, the oracle went against him. Only if the
man elected by the plebians to the position of tribune was amenable
to the patricians, would the oracle favour him and give him the
opportunity of actually assuming office. What did the plebians gain
by their right to elect a tribune? The answer must be, nothing in
reality. Their efforts proved meaningless because they did not trace
the malady to its source. If they had, they would, at the same time
that they demanded a tribune of their election, have also settled the
question of who should be the priest at Delphi. The disease could not
be eradicated by demanding a tribune; it needed control of the priestly
office; which the plebians failed to perceive. We too, while we seek a
way to remove untouchability, must inquire closely into what will
eradicate the disease; otherwise we too may miss our aim. Do not be
foolish enough to believe that removal of the restrictions on social
intercourse or interdrinking will remove untouchability.
Remember that if the prohibitions on social intercourse and
interdrinking go, the roots of untouchability are not removed. Release
from these two restrictions will, at the most, remove untouchability
as it appears outside the home; but it will leave untouchability in the home untouched. If we want to remove untouchability in the home
as well as outside, we must break down the prohibition against
intermarriage. Nothing else will serve. From another point of view,
we see that breaking down the bar against intermarriage is the way to
establish real equality. Anyone must confess that when the root
division is dissolved, incidental points of separateness will disappear
by themselves. The interdictions on interdining, interdrinking and
social intercourse have all sprung from the one interdiction against
intermarriage. Remove the last and no special efforts are needed to
move the rest. They will disappear of their own accord. In my view
the removal of untouchability consists in breaking down the ban on
intermarriage and doing so will establish real equality. If we wish to
mt out untouchability, we must recognize that the root of
untouchability is in the ban on intermarriage. Even if our attack today
is on the ban against interdrinking, we must press it home against the
ban on intermarriage; otherwise untouchability cannot be removed by
the toots. Who can accomplish this task? It is no Secret that the
Brahmin class cannot do it. . While the caste system lasts, the Brahmin caste has its supremacy.
No one, of his own will, surrenders power which is in his hands. The
Brahmins have exercised their sovereignty over all other castes for
centuries. It is not likely that they will be willing to give it up and treat
the rest as equals. The Brahmins do not have the patriotism of the
Samurais of Japan. It is useless to hope that they will sacrifice their
privileges as the Samurai class did, for the sake of national unity based on a new equality. Nor does it appear likely that the task will be carried
out by other caste Hindus. These others, such as the class comprising
the Marathas and other similar ca-tes, are a class between thc
privileged and those without any rights.
A privileged class, at the cost of a little self-sacrifice, can show some
generosity. A class without any privileges has ideals and aspirations;
for, at least as a matter of self-interest, it wishes to bring about a social
reform. As a result it develops an attachment to principles rather than
to self-interest. The class of caste Hindus other than Brahmins Lies in ’
between: it cannot practise the generosity possible to the class above
and it does not develop the attachment to principles that develops in
the class below. This is why this class is seen to be concerned not so
much about attaining equality with the Brahmins as about maintaining
its status above the untouchables.
For the purposes of the social reform required, the class of caste Hindus other than Brahmins is feeble. If we are to await its help, we
should fall into the difficulties that the farmer faced, who depended
on his neighbour’s help for his harvesting, as in the story of the mother
lark and her chicks found in many textbooks.
The task of removing untouchability and establishing equality that
we have undertaken, we must carry out ourselves. Others will not do
it. Our life will gain its true meaning if we consider that we are born
to carry out this task and set to work in earnest. Let us receive this
merit which is awaiting us.
This is a struggle in order to raise ourselves; hence we are bound
to undertake it, so as to remove the obstacles to our progress. We all
know how at every turn, untouchability muddies and soils our whole
existence. We know that at one time our people were recruited in large
numbers into the troops. It was a kind of occupation socially assigned
to us and few of us needed to be anxious about earning our bread.
Other classes of our level have found their way into the troops, the
police, the courts and the offices, to earn their bread. But in the same
areas of employment you will no longer find the untouchables.
It is not that the law debars us from these jobs. Everything is
permissible as far the law is concerned. But the Government finds
itself powerless because other Hindus consider us untouchables and
look down upon us, and it acquiesces in our being kept out of
Government jobs. Nor can we take up any decent trade. It is true,
partly, that we lack money to start business, but the real difficulty is
that people regard us as untouchables and no one will accept goods
from our hands.
To sum up, untouchability is not P simple matter; it is the mother
01 all our poverty and lowliness and it has brought us to the abject
state we are in today. If we want to raise ourselves out of it, we must
undertake this task. We cannot be saved in any other way. It is a task
not br our benefit alone; it is also for the benefit of the nation.
Hindu society must sink unless the untouchability that hasbecome
a part of the four-castes system is eradicated. Among the resources
that any society needs in the struggle for life, a great resource is the
moral order of that society. And everyone must admit that a society
in which the existing moral order upholds things that disrupt the
society and condemns those that would unite the members of the
society, must find itself defeated in any struggle for life with other
societies. A society which has the opposite moral order, one in which
things that unite are considered laudable and things that divide are condemned, is sure to succeed in any such struggle.
This principle must be applied to Hindu society. Is it any wonder
that it meets defeat at every turn when it upholds a social order that
fragments its members, though it is plain to anyone who sees it that
the four-castes system is such a divisive force and that a single caste
for all, would unite society? If we wish to escape these disastrous
conditions, we must break down the framework of tbe four-castes
system and replace it by a single caste system.
Even this will not be enough. The inequality inherent in :he
four-castes system must be raoted out. Many people mock at the
principles of equality. Naturally, no man is another’s equal. One has
an impressive physique; another is slow-witted. The mockers think
that, in view of these inequalities that men are born with, the
egalitarians are absurd in telling us to regard them as equals. One is
forced to say that these mockers have not understood fully the
principle of equality.
If the principle of equality means that privilege should depend, nor
on birth, wealth, or anything else, but solely on the merits of each
man, then how can it be demanded that a man without merit, and who
is duty and vicious, should be treated on a level with a man wb~ has
merit and is clean and virtuous? Such is a counterquestion sometimes
posed. It is essential to define equality as giving equal privileges to
men of equal merit.
But before people have had an opportunity to develop their
inherent qualities and to merit privileges, it is just to treat them all
equally. In sociology, the social order is itself the most impoaant
factor in the full development of qualities that any person may possess
at birth. If slaves are constantly treated unequally, they will develop
no qualities other than those appropriate to slaves, and they wilt cever
become fit for any higher status. If the clean man always repulses the
unclean man and refuses to have anything to do with him, the
unclean man will never develop the aspiration to become clean. If the
criminal or immoral castes are given no refuge by the virtuous castes,
the criminal castes will never learn virtue.
The examples given above show that, although an equal treatment
may not create good qualities in one who does not have them 3t all,
even such qualities where they exist need equal treatment for their
development; also, developed good qualities are wasted and frusirated
without equal treatment.
On the one hand, the inequality in Hindu society stuns the progress of individuals and in consequence stunts society. On the
other hand, the same inequality prevents society from bringing intc
use powers stored in individuals. In both ways, this inequality is
weakening Hindu society, which is in disarray because of the
four-castes system.
Hence, if Hindu society is to be strengthened, we must uproot the
four-castes system and untouchability, and set the society on the
foundations of the two principles of one caste only and of equality.
The way to abolish untoucha’jility is not any other than the way to
invigorate Hindu society. Therefore I say that our work is beyond
doubt as much for the benefit of the nation as it is in our own interest.
Our work has been begun to bring about a real social revolution.
Let no one deceive himself by supposing that it is a diversion to
quieten minds entranced with sweet words. The work is sustained by
strong feeling, which is the power @t drives the movement. No one
can now arrest it. I pray to God that the social revolution which begins
here today may fulfil itself by peaceful means.
None can doubt that the responsibility of letting the revolution take
place peacefully rats more heavily on our opponents than on us.
Whether this social revolution will work peacefully or violafly wiU
depend wholly on the conduct of the caste Hindus. People who biame
the French National Assembly of 1789 for atrocities forget one tpin0.
That is, if the rulers of France had not been treacherous to’ the
Assembly, ifthe upper classes had not resisted it, had not committed
the crime of trying to suppress it with foreign help, it would have had no need to use violence in the work of thexevolution and the whole
social transformation would have been accomplished peacefully.
We say to our opponents too: please do not oppose us. Put away
the orthodox scriptures. Follow justice. And we assure you that we
shall carry out our programme peacefully.
