SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 2
TYPE: Legislative Speech / Policy Debate
Mr. President, I do not wish to take much time
because I know that the time that we have at our disposal is very short.
All the same, I wish to present certain points for the consideration of the
Honourable the Minister for Education.
The first point that I wish to bring to his attention is the fact that we
are making indeed a very very slow progress in the matter of the education
of our children. The recent report issued by the Government of India on
the progress of education makes a very sad reading. It says that if the
progress of education goes on at the rate at which it is going on today
it will take 40 years for boys and 300 years for girls of school-going age
to be brought under education. I beg to submit, Sir, that that is a very
dark-prospect for this House to contemplate. The Honourable the Finance
Member on the day on which he presented his budget told us that from
the year 1921-22 to the present day, the expenditure on education had
increased by something like 39 lakhs. Sir, taking into consideration the
amount of increase of expenditure on education and the increase in the
number of pupils in the schools, I find that the increase in the number of
pupils is certainly not commensurate with the increase of expenditure on
education. If we take the statistics from 1916-17 to 1922-23, we find that
the expenditure on education has increased by something like 100 per cent.
while the increase in the number of pupils during the same period is only
29 per cent., Sir, I know that there is a great financial stringency in this
presidency, and that we are not at present situated in a position to ask for
a rapid increase in education, but we can certainly plead for one thing. We
have in this presidency two departments, which if I may say so are working
at cross purposes. We have the Department of Education, the purpose of
which is to moralise and socialise the people. We have on the other hand
the Department of Excise which is working, if I may say so, in the reverse
direction. Sir, I think that it is not asking too much if I plead that we
should at least spend on education the same amount that we take from the
people in the form of excise revenue. The amount of expenditure that we
incur per individual in this presidency on education is only 14 annas, but the amount of money that we recover in the form of excise revenue is
Rs. 2-2-9 (Rs. 2.17), I think it is only fair that our educational expenditure
should be so adjusted that we should spend on the education of the people
as much as we take from them in the form of excise.
Another matter which is more or less analogous and to which I want to
draw the attention of my honourable friend the Minister for education is
that, at present the amount of money which we are spending on primary
education is to a large extent really wasted. The object of primary education
is to see that every child that enters the portals of a primary school does
leave it only at a stage when it becomes literate and continues to be literate
throughout the rest of his life. But if we take the statistics, we find that
out of every hundred children that enter a primary school only eighteen
reach the fourth standard; the rest of them, that is to say, 82 out of every
100, relapse into the state of illiteracy. What is the remedy for this state of
affairs ? Sir, the comments made by the Government of India in its report
on the review of education, I think might, without much excuse be read to
this House. The report says : —
“The wastage in educational effort is immense and most educationalists are
of opinion that there is no solution to this problem of wastage in educational
effort in India, but compulsion. The total wastage of educational effort and its
concurrent dissipation of educational funds in the primary classes is about fifty
per cent of the total energy put forth.”
I therefore request the Honourable the Education Minister to spend more
money on primary education, if for nothing else at least for the purpose of
seeing that what he spends bears some fruit ultimately. Sir, this argument
is not very different from the argument that was urged from the official
benches in the matter of Back Bay reclamation. We were urged to spend
more money on Back Bay because we were told that if we do not spend more
money on Back Bay what we have spent will be an utter loss. I think the
same argument might be utilised in this case, as well, and we can say that
unless we spend a sufficient amount of money, to see that every child that
enters a school reaches the fourth standard, what we have already spent
upon him is of no purpose whatsoever.
Sir, the third matter to which I wish to draw the attention of the
Honourable Minister for Education is this. Going over the figures which
give us information as to the manner by which we finance education in
this presidency I find that out of the total expenditure which we incur on
arts colleges, something like 36 per cent is financed from fees; out of the
expenditure that we incur on high schools, something like 31 per cent. is
financed from fees ; out of the expenditure that we incur on middle schools,
something like 26 per cent. is derived from fees. Now, Sir, I submit that
this is commercialisation of education. Education is something which ought
to be brought within the reach of every one. The Education Department
is not a department which can be treated on the basis of quid pro quo.
Education ought to be cheapened in all possible ways and to the greatest possible extent. I urge this plea because I feel that we are arriving at a
stage when the lower orders of society are just getting into the high schools,
middle schools and colleges, and the policy of this department therefore
ought to be to make higher education as cheap to the lower classes as it can
possibly be made. I therefore wish to draw the attention of the Honourable
Minister for Education to this rather glaring fact in the administration of
education in this presidency.
Sir, the fourth point that I wish to bring to the attention of my honourable
friend the Minister for Education is the great disparity in the comparative
advancement in education of the different classes in this presidency. But
before I go to that, I wish to explain one fact, namely, that the census report
of this presidency has, for the purpose of comparing the advancement of the
different communities in the matter of education, divided the total population
into four different classes. The first class is called “advanced Hindus”, the
second class is called “intermediate Hindus” and it includes those people
who for political purposes have now been designated as non-Brahmins i.e.,
Marathas and allied castes.
There is a third class called the backward classes which includes the
depressed classes, Hill Tribes and the Criminal Tribes. Then, we have the
fourth class which covers the Mahomedans. Bearing these divisions in mind,
one sees a great disparity in the comparative advancement of these different
communities in the matter of Education. Comparing these classes of people,
according to the order in which they stand on the basis of population and
according to the order in which they stand on the educational progress, what
do we find ? I find that the intermediate class, namely, non-Brahmins, who
are first in order on the basis of population, are third in college education,
third in secondary education and third in primary education. The Backward
classes who are second in order of population are the fourth in the order of
college education, fourth in order of secondary education and fourth in order
of primary education. The Mahomedans who are third in order of population
are second in the order of college education, second in the order of secondary
education and second in order of primary education. The advanced Hindus who
are fourth in order of population are the first in order of college education,
first in order of secondary education and first in the order of primary
education. Now, Sir, I have given an idea of the comparative disparity in
the educational advancement of the different communities. But the figures
do not give us the range of disparity in the advancement of the different
communities in our presidency. I will, therefore, present the following figures
to the Honourable the Minister for Education for his serious consideration.
Taking first the primary education, we find there are—
Advanced Hindus . . . 119 students per 1,000 of their population.
Mahomedans . . . 92 students per 1,000 of their population.
Intermediate Class . . . 38 students per 1,000 of their population.
Backward Class . . . 18 students per 1,000 of their population.
That is the state of the primary education. Coming to the secondary education,
we find—
Advanced Hindus . . . 3,000 in one lakh of their population.
Mahomedans . . . 500 in one lakh of their population.
Intermediate Class . . . 140 in one lakh of their population.
Backward Class . . . 14 in one lakh of their population.
That is the state of the secondary education. Now, coming to the college
education we find—
Advanced Hindus . . . 1,000 in two lakhs of their population.
Mahomedans . . . 52 in two lakhs of their population.
Intermediate Class . . . 14 in two lakhs of their population.
Backward Class . . . Nil (or nearly one if at all).
That is the state of the backward class, as far as the college education is
concerned, when their total population is something like 37½ lakhs. Sir, these
figures show two things conclusively : one, that the different communities are
not on a par in the matter of education. They also show another thing to
which I should like to draw the attention of the honourable House, namely
that the Mahomedans have stolen an enormous march in the matter of
education. Sir, this is not an imaginary statement. The statistics I have
given to this honourable House are from the Report of the Director of Public
Instruction for Bombay for 1923-24, and in support of this argument I may
cite the opinion of no less a person than Sir Ibrahim Rahimtoola who made
the same remark from the presidential chair of the Mahomedan Conference.
It may be remembered that I am not making this statement in any carping
spirit nor grudge the efforts that Government have made in the matter of
the education of Mahomedans. I must here emphasise that this country is
composed of different communities. All these communities are unequal in their
status and progress. If they are to be brought to the level of equality then
the only remedy is to adopt the principle of inequality and to give favoured
treatment to those who are below the level. There are some I know who
object to this and adhere to the principle of equality of treatment. But I say
Government has done well in applying this principle to the Mahomedans. For
I honestly believe that equality of treatment to people who are unequal is
simply another name for indifferentism and neglect My only complaint is that
Government has not yet thought fit to apply this principle to the backward
classes. Economically speaking or socially speaking, backward classes are
handicapped in a manner in which no other community is handicapped. I,
therefore, think that the principle of favoured treatment must be adopted
in their case. As I have shown, their position is worse than that of the
Mahomedans and my only pleading is that if the most favoured treatment is to
be given to those who deserve it and need it most, then the backward classes
deserve more attention of Government than do the Mahomedans. That is the
question which I prominently, wish to place before this House, and I urge upon
the Honourable the Minister for Education that he should adopt the same methods and principle towards the uplift of the backward classes as have
been adopted towards the uplift of the Mahomedan community. Sir, I may
refer the Honourable Minister to the instructions issued by the Government
of India in 1885 on the Report of the Education Commission of 1882. There
were several proposals put forward for improving the education of the
Mahomedan community ; the proposal on which the Government of India,
however, laid stress was the appointment of a special inspecting staff to
look to the educational wants of the Mahomedan community and to bring
home to it the necessity of education. I think there is an equal urgency
for special inspecting staff to look after the education of the depressed
classes. I may mention, Sir, that the Primary Education Act is a great
wrong. Perhaps honourable members may not agree with me, but I say
it is a wrong, it is double wrong. It is wrong because the responsibility
of education is transferred to the hands of those who are not enlightened
enough to understand that education is a great necessity. If there are any
people who realise the necessity for education they are not to be found in
this Council. The members of the local boards are too uneducated to realize
that education is a necessity. Therefore, I say this Council has done a great
wrong in transferring the responsibility for education to the hands of those
people who do not feel for education. Again, the transfer of education to
local bodies is a wrong because the burden has thereby been transferred to
shoulders less broad to bear it. Sir, education of the masses, we all realize,
is a matter of great cost and if there is any body which can be said to be
able to bear it, it is this Council with its revenue of 15½ crores and not
the local bodies with their meagre revenues of a few lakhs. I feel, Sir, that
this Council in transferring education to the local bodies has practically
postponed the spread of education among the masses sine die and in doing
so has gravely erred. But, Sir, this is only preliminary to, the point which
I wish to make, namely that the people who are the greatest sufferers by
this wrong are the depressed classes. With great respect to the Honourable
the Minister for Local Self-Government, I am impelled to say that his local
boards are conceived after the fashion of money houses in a museum where
the aim of the curator is to make room for one individual of every species.
Sir, there is only one representative of the depressed classes provided in
each local body. What is the utility of having only one representative of
these classes ? I cannot understand. If, for instance, the representation of
the depressed classes in a local board is intended to force upon the local
board the policy which is in the interests of the depressed classes, it is
futile. For, certainly, one man cannot count in a body of ten or twelve. I
hear complaints from all parts of the presidency that, under the present
regime, the depressed classes find themselves in a most helpless condition.
They are surrounded by people who by no means share their aspirations or
their desires for advancement and betterment. There is, therefore, all the
greater necessity, I say that this Government should employ certain inspecting
agency under their direct control which will see that the depressed classes
are not neglected by the bodies to whose charge such an important subject
like education has been entrusted.
The second thing that I wish to say about the depressed classes is that I find a certain sum has been set aside in the budget for scholarships for
the backward communities. Now, Sir, I cannot understand the connotation
of the words “backward classes” as used in the budget. I would have
very much wished that the Honourable Minister had adopted the samephraseology which the Director of Public Instruction adopts in his report,
and I should very much like to see that he allocates a separate and distinct
sum to each of the different communities which he proposes to include in
the term “backward classes.” We would then be in a position to know how
the intermediate Hindus, backward Hindus, and the Mahomedans progress
year by year. Now-a-days we are lumped together, when, as a matter of
fact, there is no reason to lump us all together, because we are certainly
different from one another however much we might wish to say we are one.
And the third thing which I wish to point out and which I hope the
Honourable Minister will give his best consideration to, is the method of
giving scholarships to the boys of the depressed classes. Now scholarship as
an aid is better than no aid at all. But my honourable friend the Minister for
Education will take it from me that my enquiries and my experience show
that the method of giving scholarships is really a waste of public money.
The depressed class parents are too poor, too ignorant, to understand that
the help given by Government is really the help for the education of the
child. The scholarship is looked upon by the parent as a family aid to meet
their expenses. It is certainly not made available for the education of the boy
as such, which is the primary object of the scholarship. Secondly, Sir, with
the scholarship I have found that the boy is never able to reach the goal.
There are a variety of reasons for that. First of all, a boy of the depressed
classes is growing up in an evil set of surroundings. .......
An Honourable Member: Who is responsible for that ?
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: God knows. He is brought up in circumstances which
are by no means desirable, and when a boy gets a scholarship, he is an easy
prey to all sorts of evil influences. Without proper direction he succumbs
and gives up his education and money spent upon him is lost. I would,
therefore, put it to the Honourable Minister whether it will not be better
for him to spend this money in promoting hostels which either Government
may open of its own accord or which may be opened by private agency for
the promotion of the education of the backward classes. Sir, it will be a
double saving. A hostel, first of all, weans the boy from evil surroundings.
It provides effective inspection. And when a hostel is managed by private
agency, it will mean some saving of money to Government.
Sir, these are the three suggestions which I wish to make in the very short
time that is at my disposal. I hope that my honourable friend the Minister
of Education will carefully consider them and do the needful in the matter.