SOURCE: Constituent Assembly Debates of India
SPEECH TITLE: Final Speech on the Adoption of the Constitution of India
TYPE: Constitutional Speech / Legislative Address
As much defence as could be offered to the constitution has been
offered by my friends Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar and Mr. TT
Krishnamachari. I shall not therefore enter into the merits of the
Constitution. Because I feel, however good a Constitution may be, it is sure
to turn out bad because those who are called to work it, happen to be a
bad lot. However bad a Constitution may be, it may turn out to be good if
those who are called to work it, happen to be a good lot. The working of a
Constitution does not depend wholly upon the nature of the Constitution.
The Constitution can provide only the organs of State such as the
Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary. The factors on which the
working of those organs of the State depends are the people and the
political parties they will set up as their instruments to carry out their
wishes and their politics. Who can say how the people of India and their
purposes or will they prefer revolutionary methods of achieving them? If
they adopt the revolutionary methods, however good the Constitution
may be, it requires no prophet to say that it will fail. It is, therefore, futile to pass any judgement upon the Constitution without reference to the
part which the people and their parties are likely to play.
The condemnation of the Constitution largely comes from two
quarters, the Communist Party and the Socialist Party. Why do they
condemn the Constitution? Is it because it is really a bad Constitution? I
venture to say no'. The Communist Party want a Constitution based upon
the principle of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. They condemn the
Constitution because it is based upon parliamentary democracy. The
Socialists want two things. The first thing they want is that if they come in
power, the Constitution must give them the freedom to nationalize or
socialize all private property without payment of compensation. The
second thing that the Socialists want is that the Fundamental Rights
mentioned in the Constitution must be absolute and without any
limitations so that if their Party fails to come into power, they would have
the unfettered freedom not merely to criticize, but also to overthrow the
State.
These are the main grounds on which the Constitution is being
condemned. I do not say that the principle of parliamentary democracy is
the only ideal form of political democracy. I do not say that the principle of
no acquisition of private property without' compensation is so sacrosanct
that there can be no departure from it. I do not say that Fundamental
Rights can never be absolute and the limitations set upon them can never
be lifted. What I do say is that the principles embodied in the Constitution
are the views of the present generation or if you think this to be an overstatement, I say they are the views of the members of the Constituent
Assembly. Why blame the Drafting Committee for embodying them in the
Constitution? I say why blame even the Members of the Constituent
Assembly? Jefferson, the great American statesman who played so great a
part in the making of the American constitution, has expressed some very
weighty views which makers of Constitution, can never afford to ignore. In
one place he has said:-
“We may consider each generation as a distinct nation, with a right, by
the will of the majority, to bind themselves, but none to bind the
succeeding generation, more than the inhabitants of another country”.
In another place, he has said: 
“The idea that institutions established for the use of the national
cannot be touched or modified, even to make them answer their end,
because of rights gratuitously supposed in those employed to manage
them in the trust for the public, may perhaps be a salutary provision
against the abuses of a monarch, but is most absurd against the nation
itself Yet our lawyers and priests generally inculcate this doctrine, and
suppose that preceding generations held the earth more freely than we do;
had a right to impose laws on us, unalterable by ourselves, and that we, in
the like manner, can make laws and impose burdens on future generations,
which they will have no right to alter; in fine, that the earth belongs to the
dead and not the living”.
I admit that what .Jefferson has said is not merely true, but is
absolutely true. There can tie no question about it. Had' the Constituent
Assembly departed from this principle laid down by Jefferson it would
certainly be liable to blame, even to condemnation. But I ask, has it? Quite
the contrary. One has only to examine the provision relating to the
amendment of the Constitution. The Assembly has not only refrained from
putting a seal of finality and infallibility upon this Constitution as in Canada
or by making the amendment of the Constitution subject to the fulfilment
of extraordinary terms and conditions as in America or Australia, but has
provided a most facile procedure for amending the Constitution. I challenge
any of the critics of the Constitution to prove that any Constituent
Assembly anywhere in the world has, in the circumstances in which this
country finds itself, provided such a facile procedure for the amendment of
the Constitution. If those who are dissatisfied with the Constitution have
only to obtain a 2/3 majority and if they .cannot obtain even a two-thirds
majority in the parliament elected on adult franchise in their favour, their
dissatisfaction with the Constitution cannot be deemed to be shared by the
general public.
There is only one point of constitutional import to which I propose to
make a reference. A serious complaint is made on the ground that there is
too much of centralization and that the States have been reduced to
Municipalities. It is clear that this view is not only an exaggeration, but is
also founded on a misunderstanding of what exactly the Constitution
contrives to do. As to the relation between the Centre and the States, it is necessary to bear in mind the fundamental principle on which it rests. The
basic principle of Federalism is that the Legislative and Executive authority
is partitioned between-the Centre and the States not by any law to be made
by the Centre but by the Constitution itself. This is what Constitution does.
The States under our Constitution are in no way dependent upon the Centre
for their legislative or executive authority. The Centre and the States are coequal in this matter. It is difficult to see how such a Constitution-can be called
centralism. It may be that the Constitution assigns to the Centre too large a
field for the operation of its legislative and executive authority than is to be
found in any other federal Constitution. It may be that the residuary powers
are given to the Centre and not to the States. But these features do not form
the essence of federalism. The chief mark of federalism as I said lies in the
partition of the legislative and executive authority between the Centre and
the Units by the Constitution. This is the principle embodied in our
constitution. There can be no mistake about it. It is, therefore, wrong to say
that the States have been placed under the Centre. Centre cannot by its own
will alter the boundary of that partition. Nor can the Judiciary. For as has
been well said:
“Courts may modify, they cannot replace. They can revise earlier
interpretations as new arguments, new points of view are presented, they
can shift the dividing line in marginal cases, but there are barriers they
cannot pass, definite assignments of power they cannot reallocate. They
can give a broadening construction of existing powers, but they cannot
assign to one authority powers explicitly granted to another”
The first charge of centralization defeating federalism must therefore
fall.
The second charge is that the Centre has been given the power to
override the States. This charge must be admitted. But before condemning
the Constitution for containing such overriding powers, certain
considerations must be borne in mind. The first is that these overriding
powers do not form the normal feature of the constitution. Their use and
operation are expressly confined to emergencies only. The second
consideration is: Could we avoid giving overriding powers to the Centre when
an emergency has arisen? Those who do not admit the justification for such
overriding powers to the Centre even in an emergency, do not seem to have a clear idea of the problem which lies at the root of the matter. The problem is
so clearly set out by a writer in that well-known magazine "The Round Table"
in its issue of December 1935 that I offer no apology for quoting the following
extract from it. Says the writer:
“Political systems are a complex of rights and duties resting
ultimately on the question, to whom, or to what authority. Does the
citizen owe allegiance? In normal affairs the question is not present, for the
law works smoothly, and a man, goes about his business obeying one
authority in this set of matters and another authority in that. But in a
moment of crisis, a conflict of claims may arise, and it is then apparent that
ultimate allegiance cannot be divided. The issue of allegiance cannot be
determined in the last resort by a juristic interpretation of statutes. The
law must conform to the facts or so much the worse for the law. When all
formalism is stripped away, the bare question is what authority commands
the residual loyalty of the citizen. Is it the Centre or the Constituent State?”
The solution of this problem depends upon one's answer to this
question which is the crux of the problem. There can be no doubt that in the
opinion of the vast majority of the people, the residual loyalty of the citizen in
an emergency must be to the Centre and not to the Constituent States. For it
is only the Centre which can work for a common end and for the general
interests of the country as a whole. Herein lies the justification for giving to all
Centre certain overriding powers to be used in an emergency. And after all
what is' the obligation imposed upon the Constituent States by these
emergency powers? No more than this - that in an emergency, they should
take into consideration alongside their own local interests, the opinions and
interests of the nation as a whole. Only those who have, but understood the
problem, can complain against it.
Here I could have ended. But my mind is so full of the future of our
country that I feel I ought to take this occasion to give expression to some
of my reflections thereon. On herJanuary 1950, India will be an independent
country (Cheers). What would happen to his independence? Will she
maintain her independence or will she lose it again? This is the first thought
that comes to my mind. It is not that India was never an independent
country. The point is that she once lost the independence she had. Will she
lose it a second time? It is this thought which makes me most anxious for the future. What perturbs me greatly is the fact -that not only India has
once before lost her independence, but -she lost it by the infidelity and
treachery of some of her own people. In the invasion of Sind by
Mahommed-Bin-Kasim, the military commanders of King Dahar accepted
bribes from the agents of Mahommed-Bin-Kasim and refused to fight on the
side of their King. It was Jaichand who invited Mahommed Gohri to invade
'India and fight against Prithvi Raj and promised him the help of himself and
the Solanki Kings. When Shivaji was fighting for the liberation of Hindus,
the other Maratha noblemen and the Rajput Kings were fighting the battle
on the side of Moghul Emperors. When the British were trying to destroy
the Sikh Rulers, Gulab Singh, their principal commander sat silent and did
not help to save the Sikh Kingdom. In 1857, when a large part of India had
declared a war of independence against the British, the Sikhs stood and
watched the event as silent spectators.
Will history repeat itself? It is this thought which fills me with
anxiety. This anxiety is deepened by the realization of the fact that in
addition to our old enemies in the form of castes and creeds .we are going
to have many political parties with diverse and opposing political creeds.
Will Indian place the country above their creed or will they place creed
above country? I do not know. But this much is certain that if the parties
place creed above country, our independence will be put in jeopardy a
second time and probably be lost for ever. This eventuality we must all
resolutely guard against. We must be determined to defend our
independence with the last drop of our blood.(Cheers.)
On the 26th of January 1950, India would be a democratic country in
the sense that India from that day would have a government of the people,
by the people and for the people. The same thought comes to my mind.
What would happen to her democratic Constitution? Will she be able to
maintain it or will she lost it again this is the second thought that comes to
my mind and makes me as anxious as the first. 