SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 2
CONTEXT: Ambedkar emphasizes procedural rights and interpretation of the House rules regarding estoppel and waiver.
Sir, I should like to submit in reply
to what the Honourable Leader of the House has suggested, that unless you
uphold the principle that there is such a thing as waiver or estoppel, the
discussion that my honourable friend Mr. Jamnadas Mehta wants to raise
will be quite relevant under the rules of the House. With regard to the point
raised by the Honourable Leader of the House, what I should like to submit
is this, that the House may easily take the view that they have granted
sufficient funds and more shall not be granted. I submit that would be a
complete answer to the point raised by the Leader of the House. Therefore,
there can be no estoppel or waiver on the ground that the House has granted
supplies by adopting the other taxes which were discussed previously under
the head “Finance Bill”.
Then, Sir, the point I should like to raise is this. I think the issue is whether
this is a Finance Bill or a Bill which merely regulates the administrative
machinery for raising the tax. If this were a Bill merely providing for the
machinery for raising the tax and laying down the mode and method of
raising the tax, then I could quite understand the relevancy of the ruling
to which you have referred. But it seems to me, looking to the statement
of objects and reasons which is appended to the Bill, that this Bill is from
beginning to end treated by the Government as a Finance Bill. The main
object of the Bill is to raise additional revenue. The change in the machinery
is merely secondary—to provide an instrument for raising the additional
revenue. Additional revenue for the purpose of meeting the deficit caused by
the prohibition policy of Government is the principal aim of this Bill. I shall
just refer to one or two passages in the statement of objects and reasons:
“Tobacco is subject to substantial taxation in most countries. It is
absolutely essential to develop this source of revenue in order to meet
part of the loss caused by the new prohibition or anti-drink policy. In
Bombay City duty on tobacco is levied under the Tobacco Duty (Town
of Bombay) Act, 1857. Under the said Act there is already a substantial maundage fee; but the licence fee is nominal, and there is a great demand for
licences which are frequently sublet. The Bill provides for raising the licence
fee in Bombay from Re. 1 to Rs. 25 or Rs. 50, ..............”
That of course, leaves no doubt that this Bill is fundamentally a Finance
Bill and not a Bill for the purpose of laying down a machinery for raising
the tax. That is my submission. If it is a Finance Bill, then I submit, that
the House has the right to discuss whether they should grant the supply to
Government or not. With regard to the other point raised by the Honourable
Leader of the House in regard to waiver, my submission is that it is perfectly
open to the House to say : “Part of the supply we shall grant ; the rest we
shall not.”