SOURCE: Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings and Speeches Vol. 2
CONTEXT: Ambedkar supports the first reading of the Maternity Benefit Bill, arguing for women’s welfare, the responsibility of government and employers, and reasoning against objections regarding industrial burden, scope, and fairness.
Sir, I rise to support the first reading of this bill.
And in doing so I just wish to reply to a few points that have been raised
in the course of this debate against this bill. The Honourable the General
Member, in speaking against the bill, first of all, pointed out that this is not
an accident—accident as we understand it under the Workmen’s Compensation
Act, and, therefore, the principle of the Workmen’s Compensation Act cannot
be extended to the women who would be entitled to get the benefit under
this particular bill. I admit, Sir, that this is not an accident. But it does
not follow from that, that women are not entitled to get the benefit which
the proposed bill desire to confer upon them. The principle on which this
bill is based is altogether biased. There is absolutely, I believe, unanimity
on this proposition that the pre-natal conditions which affect the mother
are an important factor in the bill and the subsequent bringing up of
the child. I do not think anybody will controvert that proposition. And I
believe, therefore, Sir, that it is in the interests of the nation that the
mother ought to get a certain amount of rest during the pre-natal period
and also subsequently, and the principle of the bill is based entirely on that
principle. That being so, Sir, I am bound to admit that the burden of this
ought to be largely borne by the Government. I am prepared to admit this
fact because the conservation of the people’s welfare is primarily the concern
of the Government. And in every country, therefore, where the maternity
benefit has been introduced, you will find that the Government has been
subjected to a certain amount of charge with regard to maternity benefit.
But that being so, Sir, I am not prepared to admit that the employer who
employs a woman, under such circumstances, is altogether free from the
liability of such benefit in the interests of the woman and the reason for
this is this. There is no doubt that an employer employs women in certain
industries because he finds that there is a greater profit to be gained by
him by the employment of women than he would gain by the employment
of men. He is able to get pro rata larger benefits out of women than he
would get by employing men. That being so, it is absolutely reasonable to say
that to a certain extent at least the employer will be liable for this kind of benefit when he gets a special benefit by employing women instead of men. I,
therefore, say that although there ought to have been some liability imposed
on the Government in the matter of maternity benefit, I think the bill is
not altogether wrong if it seeks to impose the liability under the present
circumstances on the employer. I, therefore, support the bill on that account
It is stated that this bill is applied only to factories and not to other
industries or to the agricultural occupation. The reply to that is very simple.
It is to those industries where the conditions are such that they particularly
affect the health of a woman that this principle is extended. In agriculture
and other occupations the women are not exposed to those dangers or to
those factors which obtain in factories and which affect the health of the
women working in those factories. That is the reason why, for instance, such
legislation is usually confined only to factories. The same may be said, for
instance, with regard to the Workmen’s Compensation Act. That Act applies
to accident which may arise in factories in the course of the employment
of labour for this very reason, and you will find that legislation is confined
only to factories and not to other occupations.
Now, in respect of the burden on industries, the Honourable the General
Member said that it will result in the reduction of wages. I am not certain
whether it will result in a reduction of wages. Even if it does, it will mean
that the burden on the industries will to a certain extent be shifted elsewhere
and the Honourable the General Member ought therefore to have no objection
on that ground. If this bill is passed, my submission is that the burden
will probably be shifted on to the consumer and if it is shifted on to the
consumer, the society as such ought not to object to pay the larger price for
the produce in order that the producers who produce it may be benefitted.
Then, it is said that it is unjust to confine this bill to the Bombay
Presidency only and that it ought to be extended to the whole of India, and
that other Presidencies and provinces in India ought to be put on a par with
the Bombay Presidency. My submission to you, Sir, is this. Suppose that
this bill is applied to the whole of British India, what is there to prevent
somebody rising up and saying, “Why should this bill be confined to India
only and not to other countries ? India will be put at a disadvantage with
respect to the other countries of the world and therefore let us wait till the
whole world adopts the principle of this bill and then we may all be on a
par with each other”. I submit that there is no substance in this argument
and I think, therefore, the benefits contemplated by this bill ought to be
given by this Legislature to the poor women who toil in our factories in
this Presidency.