It is usual to hear all those who feel moved by the deplorable
condition of the Untouchables unburden themselves by uttering the cry
“We must do something for the Untouchables”. One seldom hears any
of the persons interested in the problem saying ‘Let us do something
to change the Touchable Hindu’. It is invariably assumed that the
object to be reclaimed is the Untouchables. If there is to be a Mission,
it must be to the Untouchables and if the Untouchables can be cured,
untouchability will vanish. Nothing requires to be done to the Touchable.
He is sound in mind, manners and morals. He is whole, there is nothing
wrong with him. Is this assumption correct ? Whether correct or not,
the Hindus like to cling to it. The assumption has the supreme merit
of satisfying themselves that they are not responsible for the problem
of the Untouchables.
How natural is such an attitude is illustrated by the attitude of
the Gentile towards the Jews. Like the Hindus the Gentiles also do
not admit that the Jewish problem is in essence a Gentile problem.
The observations of Louis Goulding on the subject are therefore very
illuminating. In order to show how the Jewish problem is in its essence
a Gentile problem, he says:
“I beg leave to give a very homely instance of the sense in which
I consider the Jewish Problem in essence a Gentile Problem. A close
acquaintance of mine is a certain Irish terrier of mixed pedigree,
the dog Paddy, who is to my friend John Smith as the apple of both
his eyes. Paddy dislikes Scotch terriers; it is enough for one to pass
within twenty yards of Paddy to deafen the neighbourhood with
challenges and insults. It is a practice which John Smith deplores,
which, therefore, he does his best to check—all the more as the
objects of Paddy’s detestation are often inoffensive creatures, who
seldom speak first. Despite all his affection for Paddy, he considers,
as I do, that Paddy’s unmannerly behaviour is due to some measure
of original sin in Paddy. It has not yet been suggested to us that
what is here involved is a Scotch Terrier Problem and that when
Paddy attacks a neighbour who is peacefully engaged in inspecting the evening smells it is the neighbour who should be arraigned for
inciting to attack by the fact of his existence.”
There is here a complete analogy between the Jewish Problem and
the problem of the Untouchables. What Paddy is to the Scotch Terrier,
the Gentile is to the Jews, and the Hindu is to the Untouchables. But
there is one aspect in which the Jewish Problem stands in contrast to
the Gentile Problem. The Jews and the Gentiles are separated by an
antagonism of the creeds. The Jewish creed is opposed to that of the
Gentile creed. The Hindus and the Untouchables are not separated by
any such antagonism. They have a common creed and observe the same
cults.
The second explanation is that the Jews wish to remain separate
from the Gentiles. While the first explanation is chauvinistic the second
seems to be founded on historical truth. Many attempts have been made
in the past by the Gentiles to assimilate the Jews. But the Jews have
always resisted them. Two instances of this may be referred.
The first instance relates to the Napoleonic regime. After the National
Assembly of France had agreed to the declaration of the ‘Rights of man’ to
the Jews, the Jewish question was again reopened by the guild merchants
and religious reactionaries of Alsace. Napoleon resolved to submit the
question to the consideration of the Jews themselves. He convened an
Assembly of Jewish Notables of France, Germany and Italy in order to
ascertain whether the principles of Judaism were compatible with the
requirements of citizenship as he wished to fuse the Jewish element with
the dominant population. The Assembly consisting of 111 deputies, met
in the Town Hall of Paris on the 25th of July 1806, and was required
to frame replies to twelve questions relating mainly to the possibility of
Jewish patriotism, the permissibility of inter-marriage between Jew and
Non-Jew, and the legality of usury. So pleased was Napoleon with the
pronouncements of the Assembly that he summoned a Sanhedrin after
the model of the ancient council of Jerusalem to convert them into the
decree of a Legislative body. The Sanhedrin, comprising of 71 deputies
from France, Germany, Holland and Italy met under the presidency of
Rabbi Sinzheim, of Strassburg on 9th February 1807, and adopted a sort of
Charter which exhorted the Jews to look upon France as their fatherland,
to regard its citizens as their brethren, and to speak its language, and
which also pressed toleration of marriages between Jews and Christians
while declaring that they could not be sanctioned by the synagogue. It
will be noted that the Jews refused to sanction inter marriages between
Jews and non-Jews. They only agreed to tolerate them.
The second instance relates to what happened when the Batavian
Republic was established in 1795. The more energetic members of the
Jewish community pressed for a removal of the many disabilities under
which they laboured. But the demand for the fuller rights of citizenship
made by the progressive Jews was at first, strangely enough, opposed by
the leaders of the Amsterdam community, who feared that civil equality
would militate against the conservation of Judaism and declared that
their co-religionists renounced their rights of citizenship in obedience to
the dictates of their faith. This shows that the Jews preferred to live as
strangers rather than as members of the community.
Whatever the value of their explanations the Gentiles have at least
realized that there rests upon them a responsibility to show cause for
their unnatural attitude towards the Jews. The Hindu has never realised
this responsibility of justifying his treatment of the Untouchables. The
responsibility of the Hindus is much greater because there is no plausible
explanation he can offer in justification of untouchability. He cannot
say that the Untouchable is a leper or a mortal wretch who must be
shunned. He cannot say that between him and the Untouchables, there
is a gulf due to religious antagonism which is not possible to bridge. Nor
can he plead that it is the Untouchable who does not wish to assimilate
with the Hindus.
But that is not the case with the Untouchables. They too are in a
different sense an eternal people who are separate from the rest. But
this separateness, their segregation is not the result of their wish.
They are punished not because they do not want to mix. They are
punished because they want to be one with the Hindus. In other words,
though the problem of the Jews and of the Untouchables is similar in
nature—inasmuch as the problem is created by others—it is essentially
different. The Jew’s case is one of the voluntary isolation. The case of
the Untouchables is that of compulsory segregation. Untouchability is
an infliction and not a choice.